[page 1]

        Brief
        ANNALS
          of
    Church and State,
         under
     Queen Elizabeth.

        Number Ⅰ.

Report from sir Edward Kelly in Bohemia, June 1589,
  against Parkyns a Jesuit : brought by Robert Tatton
  and Geo. Leycester.   Thus writ upon the backside of the
  paper following, by the lord treasurer Burghley, viz.
Certain articles of the discovery of high treason, made by
  sir Edward Kelly, baron of Bohemia, unto certain Eng-
  lish gentlemen, which came to visit him at Tribona in
  the said kingdom, the latter end of June, 1589, whose
  names are here subscribed.

Ⅰ. THAT fourteen days before the feast of Pentecost last
past, one Parkyns, born in England, and now a Jesuit,
came from Rome to the city of Prague in Bohemia.   And
there coming into an inn, where the said sir E. K. was, and
uttering divers novelties, among others he plainly (but as
it were in great secresy) opened to the said sir E. K. this
horrible conspiracy against her majesty :
  Ⅰ. That there were now seven such ways or means, con-
cluded and agreed upon by the pope and his confederates,
for the murthering of the queen, that if the first, second,
third, fourth, and fifth failed, yet were the [plots] &c. in

[page 2]

such sort to be executed, that the sixth or seventh should
take effect : yes, if all the devils in hell thereunto say nay.
  ⅠⅠ. And further Parkyns declared, that those ways and
means were by him and his coherents to be executed against
her majesty’s own person : for the performance whereof he
declared also, that he would forthwith go into England by
the way of Danzige. And so from thence, in the habit of a
merchant, into England.
  ⅠⅠⅠ. That when the said sir E. K. declared the same
strange news to the lord Rosenburgh, viceroy of Bohemia,
the said Rosenburgh told sir Edward, that the said Parkyns
was the right hand, or chief man to the king of Spain and the
pope, in all their treacherous enterprises against England.
  ⅠⅤ. At the same time and instant the said L. Rosen-
burgh shewed unto sir E. K. a letter, written by one of the
chief of the states of the Low Countries with the emperor,
requesting the emperor to be a means to take up the matter
between them and the king of Spain.   And also requesting
this emperor to send them some aid, to help them away
with the English that were in those provinces.
  Ⅴ. That the said sir Edward, at his faithful disclosing
those things (thus by divine Providence come to his know-
ledge) to these subscribed gentlemen, did furthermore much
marvel and wonder, how it was possible that the strangers
of the Low Countries, dwelling in England, would or could
lend and send unto the emperor or king of Spain a million
of gold at any time or times, to his or their helps : which he
of his certain knowledge assured to be done.   But he well
hoped, that the treason therein by this time was come to
the knowledge of some of her majesty’s most honourable
privy-council.
  “ We Robert Tatton, and George Leycester, gentlemen,
“ do witness these articles, and the effect of every part of
“ them, to have been declared unto us, and Edmund Hil-
“ ton, servant to the rt. worshipful John Dee, esq. by the
“ within named sir E. K. at our being with him at Trebona
“ in Boeme in the end of June last, 1589.”

To which may be added two letters to the said Kelly,

[page 3]

wrote by the lord treasurer Burghley, as a remaining me-
morial of the same famous man, some time of this nation
native.

        Number II.

The lord Burghley, lord treasurer, to sir Edward Kelly,
  written ann. 1591, declaring the value he and others had
  of him, upon the account of his great knowledge and
  virtue ; and inviting him to return to his own country :
  and begging a medicine from him for his old enemy the
  gout.
  MY most hearty commendations premised.   I have cause
to thank you, and so I do very heartily, for your good, kind
letter sent to me by our countryman, Mr. Royden : who
maketh such good report of you, (as doth every other man
that hath had a conversation with you,) as that I am com-
forted to hear their reports.   Yet I have the same mingled
with some grief, that none of them can give me any good
assurance of your return hither ; the thing most earnestly
desired of all well disposed persons to the queen’s majesty,
and to their countrymen : and what may be the stays there-
of, I may rather guess, than judge them of moment, to re-
tain a person of such a value in knowledge and virtue, (as
I take you to be,) from the consummation of your felicity
in your own native country : and so having writ to Mr.
Dyar more largely, I refer myself to his dealing with you :
wishing such success without further delay, as may be to
the satisfaction of us all here, that love and honour virtue
and knowledge in whomsoever we may find it.   And I hope
to hear from you to have something of your approbation, to
strengthen me afore the next winter against my old enemy
the gout : which is rather by a cold humour than a hot,
and principally by a rheumatic head.   Which I also think
receiveth the imperfection from a stomach, not fully digest-
ing the food received.   But to affirm what I take is the
most direct cause is, oppression of affairs, and lack of li-
berty : against the which no medicinal receipt can serve.

[page 4]

And yet I will bo glad to make much of any receipt you
shall send me, with your assurance that it shall do me no
harm.
  And so I pray God to direct you to bestow your gifts
that God hath given you, rather upon your own prince and
country, than upon strangers.   From the court now at my
house of Theobalds, the     of May, 1591.

        Number ⅠⅠⅠ.

The lord treasurer Burghley to sir Edward Kelly, in an-
  swer to a letter from him, brought by Mr. Dyar.   Exhort-
  ing him earnestly, and that by command from the queen,
  to come over into his own native country ; that they might
  receive the honour and service that his great wisdom
  and knowledge deserved.   Written by that lord’s own hand.
    Good sir Edward Kelly,
  I HAVE received your letter, brought by my very
friend, Mr. Edward Dyar : with the style whereof, and
wisdom well mixed, and with a natural dutiful regard to
your country and sovereign, I have been both much de-
lighted and fully satisfied.   And for any particular answer
to the parts of your letter, I need not otherwise to write
thereof, but in this general sort, that I like of all that you
have written ; although I should have best of all liked of
your own access.   I will not enter into argument of the
misliking I have in that you cannot.   For without more par-
ticular knowledge of the impediments, I may not give any
such censures, as some inconsiderately, yea, uncharitably
may do.   I conceive by your writing, that you confess a de-
sire to return to your native country ; which is very com-
mendable in you.   I perceive also by your own words ex-
pressly, that your mind draweth you toward your gracious
sovereign ; whom above all worldly majesties you desire to
serve and please : which intent you also desire me to fur-
ther.   And what can be required of any Christian subject

[page 5]

beyond this offer?   No Momus can reprehend this sincerity.
And yet, nevertheless, I would not have you ignorant, that
sundry men, being not acquainted with these your faithful
offers and purposes, let not in some sort (since it is seen
that you came not with Mr. Dyar) to divine variously of
your stay.   Some saying, that you do forbear to come, be-
cause you cannot perform that indeed which hath been re-
ported of you.   Some, that you are inticed by such as bear
not the queen nor this realm any good will, (not to come to
benefit her majesty.) .  Some allege, that your own pro-
fession of religion doth not agree with ours here.   Yea,
some, that are maliciously disposed, say, that you are an
impostor with your sophistications, as many heretofore, both
here and in other countries, have been proved ; and that you
would fear to be proved such an one here, because of
usurers severe punishment.
  Now, good knight, though I write thus plainly to you,
yet such is my credit in Mr. Dyar ; such is my allowance
of your loyal profession ; such opinion I do firmly conceive
of your wisdom and learning, expressed in your letters ; such
also is my persuasion of your ability to perform that which
Mr. Dyar hath reported, by reason of the estimation, ho-
nour, and credit I see that you have by your behaviour ; as
I rest only unsatisfied in your delay of coming : and again
expressly commanded of her majesty to require you to have
regard to her honour, and accordingly to the tenor of her
former letters to assure yourself to be singularly favoured ;
yea, in respect of the benefits that you may, by the gifts
that God hath given you, bring to her majesty, to be ho-
noured, to the comfort of yourself and all yours.   And here
I need not to use any further arguments to persuade you
to this effect, considering natural reason may draw you to
be assured of any worldly reward convenient for you, that
is in a prince’s power, whom you shall make so happy for her
surety, as no subject that she hath can do the like.
  Good knight, therefore let me end my letter with God’s
holy name : by which I do conjure you, not to keep God’s
gifts from your natural country ; but rather to help to make

[page 6]

her majesty a glorious and victorious prince against the
malice of her and God’s enemies.   Let honest glory move
your natural heart to become honourable rather in your
own country than a strange ; and to leave a monument of
your name at home to all posterity.   Let no other country
bereave us of this felicity, that only, yea, only by you, I
say, is to be expected.   And now let no time be more driven
off and lost ; considering we are all mortal ; you that should
be author hereof, and this noble queen that should be the
receiver thereof.
  All this letter is by me written, as an answer to your let-
ter sent by Mr. Dyar.   And now I may not omit to thank
you for the mountain or rock that you sent, and was safely
brought to me from Stoden : which I will place in my
house, where I do bestow other rare things of workman-
ship ; and shall be a memorial of your kindness.   Wishing
I might enjoy some small receipt from you, that might
comfort my spirits in mine age, rather than my coffers with
any wealth : for I esteem health above wealth.

[…]
