[page 131]

[…]

There was an English gentleman, called sir Edward Kelly, Sir Ed-
now or late at Prague, in the parts of Germany, that was
confidently reported to have, as we say, the philosopher’s
stone ; and by a certain powder, by his hidden art pre-
pared, by transmutation of baser metal, to make gold and
silver.   The fame of this person made the queen, and others
of the court, earnestly endeavour his return into England ;
especially since Mr. Dyer, an agent, as it seems, of the
queen in that country, that knew him well, had assured
the lord treasurer of his skill obtained thereof by his great
study, and of his desire to come and pay his service to the
queen.   Letters had passed between them for this purpose.
And the queen had appointed that lord to write to the
agent to prevail with Kelly to come over, with assurance of
all respects, and an honourable reception from her.   For
when he had been moved by Dyer, upon the queen’s invi-
tation, to go into England, some there were (that had no
mind he should) had thrown doubts into his head of the
danger he might incur of trouble, if he went.   To take off
this scruple from Kelly, that lord, in a letter to the said
Dyer, gave him all assurance to the contrary, and that
from the queen herself ; whose word might be taken, being
so virtuous, so noble, and so honourable a princess.   And
so he was desired to acquaint that knight ; to remove any
such jealousies out of his mind.   He proceeded ; “ That
“ there were indeed some in England that spake against
“ him, as pretending to do a thing impossible ; and others
“ had said, that some such there had been, that pretended

[page 132]

“ to that skill, that proved but cheats.   But that they at
“ the court had a more honourable opinion of him.   That
“ his coming would now especially be seasonable to her
“ majesty, being now ready to encounter the king of Spain,
“ that was advancing towards England with his mighty
“ preparations.   And so Kelly might be very instrumental,
“ by his admirable art, in rescuing his native country from
“ that imminent danger.”
  At the conclusion of his letter, he desired Dyer, for the
fuller satisfaction of the queen, “ to obtain from Kelly, to
“ be sent over to the queen, a very small portion of that
“ powder, which he used in his art, to make a demonstra-
“ tion to the queen : on sight of the perfection of his know-
“ ledge.   Or, that if he [the lord treasurer] might have his
“ wish, to send, for a token to her majesty, such a portion
“ of it, in a secret box, as might serve, for a reasonable
“ sum, to defray her charges that summer for her navy.”
All this and a great deal more did that letter of the lord
treasurer contain ; which in respect of the curiosity of the
subject, and eminency of the person, I could not but give
it a place in the Appendix.
  What belief the queen and court indeed had of this
gentleman’s extraordinary skill is uncertain ; but the im-
portant reasons that moved them to draw him into Eng-
land were, his singular parts and abilities in learning, ex-
perience in foreign courts and dominions, and his good de-
serts to his native country.   This I gather from a secret
letter writ the next year to secretary Walsingham, by D.
Dee, (probably the famous astrologer of that name,) who
was now abroad in some place in the Low Countries, and
gave the secretary intelligence of affairs.   Wherein, among
other things, he spake of sir Edward Kelly with much ho-
nour and deference, for his informations sent from abroad,
out of his favour to the English nation in these critical
times.   And that as he [D. Dee] had understood divers
things of dangerous consequence against the good state of
his native country from divers, so particularly from Mr.
Edward Kelly : “ One who, of all the strangers and in-

[page 133]

“ habitants of that city, [whence D. Dee now wrote, per-
“ haps Antwerp,] was the sharpest witted, the greatest un-
“ derstander of all occurrents general, yea, of very secret
“ purposes of divers great ones ; the best languaged a ; one
“ heretofore employed in consultations between the orders
“ of both parties ; [Spain, and those of the Low Coun-
“ tries ;] one who had been tried courageous in their first
“ bickerings against the Spaniard at Antwerp ; and one
“ who seemed to have observed [of those innovations in the
“ Low Countries] the beginnings, proceedings, and errors,
“ political and military, committed on divers parts.   Add-
“ ing, that this man’s counsel he had required upon his
“ own grave declaration of such matters before specified,
“ by way of familiar discourse, as they now and then vi-
“ sited one another.”   And that Kelly had shewed him,
“ How, in his judgment, with her majesty’s royal honour
“ and indemnity, the unquiet and alienated minds of this
“ common and inferior sort of people might receive conso-
“ lation assured, and be recovered to due love and fidelity.
“ to her majesty ; and also the heads (called the states, or
“ orders) might be reformed : so as finally these provinces
“ first might find and account themselves happy under her
“ majesty's government royal.”
  This period of a private letter to secretary Walsingham
will let in some light to the character of this man, and of
the desire that was had of his return into England.   I add
the honour this English gentleman had abroad.   Living at
Prague in Germany, he was known to the emperor, who
made him a baron.   For thus did D. Dee signify in his
aforesaid letter : “ Mr. Edward Kelly, now in most fa-
“ vourable manner created a baron of the kingdom of Bo-
“ hernia ; with the grant of a coat of arms ; as I have seen
“ in a large seal, being a lion rampant with [the lion of
“ England,] in a bordure, with the year on the seal, viz.
“ 1573, and a motto round it."
  I do not find, notwithstanding the aforesaid honourable
and earnest invitation given him by the English court, that
Kelly came into England. And indeed it appears, that he

[page 134]

was not long after put under custody by the emperor.   And
that, as it is likely, to hinder his journey.   But this will de-
serve a more particular relation ; which I am able to give
from a letter of an English merchant, as it seems, at Frank-
ford, to Mr. Edward Wotton, an eminent gentleman and
courtier in England ; wrote in the year 1591 ; viz. That
he was seized by a private order from the emperor (the
cause concealed) in April the said year, several great offi-
cers coming to his house in Prague for that purpose ; and
where Mr. Dier was with him : but he, without acquaint-
ing any one person in his house, on a sudden conveyed
himself away with all secrecy ; and so escaped for two or
three days : till being searched for and pursued, was after-
wards taken, going, as he pretended, only to visit his pa-
tron, the earl of Rosembergh : and so he was committed pri-
soner to the castle.   This was surprising news in those parts ;
especially towards a personage that had been so highly va-
lued, and ennobled by the emperor himself.   And various
conjectures were made of the reasons that moved him to
proceed in this manner.   It was at first generally thought,
that the invitation (whereof some pretended to have seen
the letter) of his return into England occasioned it.   Other
causes thereof were talked of.   As though it were some crime
intended to be committed against the emperor’s own person.
Some, that it was upon account of a great debt of 32,000
dollars, which he owed to two merchants in Colen, with
whom he traded for jewels.   But that could be no cause ;
for that he was known to be well able to discharge that
debt, being rich in money and lands.   And to the emperor
he owed nothing, nor ever put him to any charge ; except
for coals and houseroom, [for his employment in his chy-
mistry.]   Another reason given out for this his surprising
apprehension, and that one of the chief, was, that the em-
peror having been troubled a great while with a throbbing
in his heart, which caused him soon to fall into a swoon,
and seemed to be a distemper hereditary, sir Edward Kelly
had distilled an oil for his use in that case.   But some of
Kelly’s enemies being by, persuaded the emperor that he

[page 135]

had intended to poison him with it.   These, with other rea-
sons of this dealing with this man, were reported about.   All
which, with the several circumstances of his being taken,
and further remarks of him and his misfortune, I leave to
be read at large in the aforesaid letter.
  But to bring together something more of this famous
English chymist, and the high esteem the queen had of this
her subject ; she despatched an agent, one Webb, in the
year 1591, on purpose, with her letters to the emperor in
Kelly’s behalf.   And he had also letters of credence, and
instructions for his demeanour in this affair.   And that he
should get all the information he could from Mr. Dyer ;
who still (and, as it seemed, under restraint) remained
there : for whom also was part of his message.   The in-
structions were as follow ; which I transcribe from the lord
treasurer’s own hand :
  “ You shall have her majesty’s letter to the emperor’s
“ majesty, to the duke of Saxe, the elector, and to the
“ landsgrave van Hesse, and a general salve conduct for
“ you to all princes and states, to permit you to pass safely
“ through their dominions.   When you shall arrive on the
“ other side the seas, you shall endeavour yourself to un-
“ derstand the truth of the country report made of Mr. Ed-
“ ward Dyer’s stay or arrest ; and accordingly thereto you
“ shall direct your journey towards him.   And if he shall be
“ stayed in Prague, or in any other place in Bohemia, or
“ elsewhere, by the emperor’s commandment, you shall do
“ the best you can to give him knowledge, that you are
“ sent to him by her majesty, to procure his liberty and
“ return.   And for that purpose to let him know, that you
“ have her majesty’s special letter to the emperor’s majesty ;
“ which you shall, if he so will, carry to his majesty, and
“ solicit his delivery.   And therein you shall use such rea-
“ son to the emperor in defence of Mr. Dyer’s cause, as he
“ shall inform you to be meet.
  “ But if Mr. Dyer be not arrested by the emperor, but
“ shall be stayed in any other place in the territories of
“ any other prince of the empire, as the duke of Saxe, or

[page 136]

“ the landgrave ; then you shall do as the letters to them
“ directed.   Or if he be out of their jurisdiction, yet you
“ shall consider, either in your own judgment, or from
“ knowledge had from Mr. Dyar, whether you shall seek
“ a mandate from the emperor from her majesty’s letters,
“ or from the favour of the duke of Saxe, or the lantgrave.
“ Both which, her majesty is well assured, will further her
  “ You shall also inquire diligently where sir Edward
“ Kelly is arrested, or for what cause ; whereof there are
“ divers reports.   Some, that he is arrested at the suit of
“ some to whom he is indebted in a sum of xxv thousand
“ crowns.   Some, that the emperor hath made him a pri-
“ soner for abusing of his majesty, with profession that he
“ could multiply gold, and found therein to have deceived
“ many. By some, that his intention was secretly to have
“ come into England, and here to have served her majesty
“ with his science : and that by malice of the pope’s nuncio,
“ or the Spanish ambassador, or otherwise by the emperor ;
“ as unwilling to have her majesty benefited by him with
“ his science.   And so in doubtful sort the reports are
“ made : whereof you seek to inquire the truth.   Whereof
“ none shall better inform you than Mr. Edward Dyar.
“ If there be any other Englishman stayed with Mr. Dyar,
“ you shall do your best to recover their liberty.   And as
“ soon after your arrival in Germany you shall understand
“ the truth of Mr. Dyar’s state, you shall advertise hither.”
