---
---

[page 210]

[…]

            John Davys (1550—1605).
  * Memorandum —: Mr. Browne, the mathematicall in-
strument maker of the Minories, told me that the sea-
quadrant was invented by Captaine Davy . . . yeares
since,—he that found out the streights called Davys’s
Streights.
            Arthur Dee (1579–1651).
  ** ‘ Arthur Dee,’ (sonne of John Dee), a physitian at
Norwych, ‘ was born 13 Julii 1579, manè, horâ 4. 30′ fere
(vel potius, 25 min.) in ipso ortu so] is, ut existimo ’—Thus
I find it in his father’s Ephemerides.
  Obiit Norwychi about 1650.
  *** 〈Arthur Dee told Dr. Bathurst and Dr. Wharton〉
‘ that (being but a boy) he used† to play at
quoits with the plates of gold made by pro-
jection in the garret of Dr. Dee’s lodgings in
Prague. . . . When he was 9 yeares of age and
at Trebona in Germany with his father, he was
design’d to succede Kelly as his father’s speculator.’
  **** 〈Arthur Dee〉 ‘ has often told Mr. Whitefoot, of
Norwich, who buried him, that he had more than once seen
the philosopher’s stone, and he thinks that he has written
some peice on that subject. He was a man of a very
pleasant conversation and had good practice in Norwich :
a great acquaintance of Dr. 〈Thomas〉 Browne’s.’
            John Dee (1527–1608).
  ***** John Dee:—Mr. Ashmole hath his nativitie.
Resp.—’tis in his Theatrum Chemicuni.   Hee had a very

  † Mrs. Dee,
    wife to his son
    Mr. Rowland
    Dee, told me the
    other day that
    Dr. Arthur Dee
    hath often told
    her the same.
  * MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 18v.
  ** MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 37: also ver-
    batim from the Ephemerides Stadii,
    in MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 77.
  *** In a letter from Elias Ashmole to
    Anthony Wood: MS. Ballard 14, fol. 13.
  **** In a letter from Dr. John
    Conant to Anthony Wood, 1683: MS.
    Wood F. 49, fol. 101.
  ***** MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6.ͬ

[page 211]

faire cleare rosie complexion : so had the earl of Rochester,
exceeding.
  * ‘ Johannes Dee, natus Londini, 1527, Julii 13, 4h 2′
P.M.’—this nativity¹ I copied out of the learned John
Dee’s papers in the hands of Elias Ashmole, esq.
  ** From Elias Ashmole—the father of this John Dee
was a vintner in . . . London.
  *** John Dee—from Meredith Lloyd:—Talbot, marying
an inheritresse of the prince of South Wales (who was
descended from Howel Da, i. e. Howelus bonus : the same
family from whom John Dee was descended).—Dr. Trout-
bec hath Raymund Lully’s . . . (a chymical tract) with
John Dee’s marginall notes.
  **** I left about 1674, with Mr. Elias Ashmole, 3 pages
in folio concerning him ².
Memorandum:—Mr. Meredith Lloyd tells me that his
father was Roland Dee³, a Radnorshire gen-
tleman †, and that he hath his pedegree, which
he hath promised to lend to me. He was
descended from Rees, prince of South Wales.
  My great-grandfather, William Aubrey
(LL.Dr.), and he were cosins, and intimate
acquaintance. Mr. Ashmole hath letters between
them, under their owne hands, viz. one of Dr. W. A.
to him a (ingeniosely and learnedly written) touching the
Sovraignty of the Sea, of which J. D. writt a booke which
he dedicated to queen Elizabeth and desired my great
grandfather’s advice upon it.  Dr. A.’s countrey-house was
at Kew, and J. Dee lived at Mortlack, not a mile distant.
I have heard my grandmother say they were often together.
  Arthur Dee, M.D., his son, lived and practised at Nor-
wich, an intimate friend of Sir Thomas Browne, M.D.,
who told me that Sir William Boswell, the Dutch ambas-
sador, had all John Dee’s MSS.: quaere his executors
for his papers.   He lived then somewhere in Kent.

  † J. Dee’s
    father was a
    vintner in
    London at the
    signe of . . . in
    . . . : from
    Elias Ashmole,
    esqre, who had
    it from his
    grandsonne
    (sonne of Arthur).
  * MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 78.
  ** MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 77v.
  *** MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9v.
  **** MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 37.
  a See supra, pp. 61–65.
  b Sir William Boswell.

[page 212]

Memorandum:—Sir William Boswell’s widowe lives at
Bradburne, neer Swynoke, in Kent.   Memorandum :— Mr.
Hake, of the Physitians’ Colledge, hath a MS. of Mr. John
Dee’s, which see or gett.
  Quaere A. Wood for the MSS. in the Bodlean library of
Doctor Gwyn, wherein a are severall letters between him
and John Dee, and Doctor Davies, of chymistrey and of
magicall secrets, which my worthy friend Mr. Meredith
Lloyd hath seen and read : and he tells me that he haz
been told that Dr. Barlowe gave it to the Prince of
Tuscany b.
  Meredith Lloyd sayes that John Dee’s printed booke of
Spirits, is not above the third part of what was writt,
which were in Sir Robert Cotton’s library ; many whereof
were much perished by being buryed, and Sir Robert
Cotton bought the field to digge after it.
  Memorandum :—he told me of John Dee, etc., conjuring
at a poole† in Brecknockshire, and that they
about the poole found a wedge of gold ; and that they were
troubled and indicted as conjurers at the assizes ; that a
mighty storme and tempest was raysed in harvest time,
the countrey people had not knowen the like.
  His picture in a wooden cutt is at the end of Billingsley’s
Euclid, but Mr. Elias Ashmole hath a very good painted
copie of him from his sonne Arthur.  He had a very fair,
clear c complexione (as Sir Henry Savile); a long beard
as white as milke. A very handsome man.

            Investigatio cinerum Δ

  Old goodwife Faldo 4 (a natif of Mortlak in Surrey
80 + aetatis (1672 d), did know Dr. Dee, and told me he
dyed at his howse in Mortlack, next to the howse where
the tapistry hangings are made, viz. west of that howse ;
and that he dyed about 60+, 8 or 9 yeares since (January,
1672), and lies buried in the chancell, and had a stone

  † Vide Almanac,
    about the poole
    at Brecon.
  a Anthony Wood notes, ‘ false.’
  b See Clark’s Wood’s Life and
    Times, ⅰⅰ. 158.
  c Dupl. with ‘ sanguine.’
  d ‘ 1672 ’ is added in pencil.

[page 213]

(marble) upon him. Her mother tended him in his sick-
nesse. She told me that he did entertain
the Polonian ambassador at his howse in
Mortlak, and dyed not long after ; and that
he shewed the eclipse with a darke roome to
the said ambassador†.   She beleeves that he
was eightie years old when he dyed.   She
sayd, he kept a great many stilles goeing.
That he layd the storme Sir Everard Digby.
That the children dreaded him because he was
accounted a conjurer.   He recovered the basket
of cloathes stollen, when she and his daughter
(both girles) were negligent : she knew this.
  He is buried (upon the matter) in the middest
of the chancell, a little towards the south side.
She sayd, he lies buried in the chancell between
Mr. Holt and Mr. Miles, both servants to
queen Elizabeth, and both have brasse inscrip-
tions on their marble, and that there was on
him a marble, but without any inscription,
which marble is removed ; on which old marble
is a signe of two or three brasse pinnes.   A
daughter of his (I thinke, Sarah) maried to a flax-dresser,
in Southwarke: quaere nomen.
  He dyed within a yeare, if not shortly, after the king of
Denmark was here : vide Sir Richard Baker’s Chronicle
and Capt. Wharton’s Almanac.
  * He built the gallery in the church at Mortlak.   Goody
Faldo’s father was the carpenter that work’t it.
  A stone was on his grave, which is since removed.   At
the upper end of the chancell then were steppes, which in
Oliver’s dayes were layd plaine by the minister, and then
’twas removed.   The children when they played in the
church would runne to Dr. Dee’s grave-stone.   She told
me that he forewarned Q. Elizabeth of Dr. Lopez attempt
against her (the Dr. bewrayed, ⸻ himselfe).
  He used to distill egge-shells, and ’twas from hence

  † A Brief History
    of Muscovia, by
    Mr. John Milton,
    Lond. 1682,
    pag. 100, scil.
    1588. ‘ Dr. Giles
    Fletcher went
    ambassador
    from the Queen
    to Pheodor then
    emperour ;
    whose relations,
    being judicious
    and exact, are
    best read
    entirely by
    themselves. This
    emperour, upon
    report of the
    great learning
    〈of〉 the
    mathematician,
    invited him to
    Mosco, with
    offer of two
    thousand pound
    a-yeare, and
    from Prince
    Boris one
    thousand
    markes ; to
    have his
    provision from
    the emperor’s
    table, to be
    honourably
    recieved, and
    accounted as
    one of the chief
    men in the land.
    All which Dee
    accepted not.’
  * MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 38.

[page 214]

that Ben Johnson had his hint of the alkimist, whom
he meant.
  He was a great peace-maker ; if any of the neighbours
fell out, he would never lett them alone till he had made
them friends.
  He was tall and slender.   He wore a gowne like an
artist’s gowne, with hanging sleeves, and a slitt.
  A mighty good man he was.
  He was sent ambassador for Queen Elizabeth (shee
thinkes) into Poland.
  Memorandum :—his regayning of the plate for . . . .’s
butler, who comeing from London by water with a basket of
plate, mistooke another basket that was like his.   Mr. J.
Dee bid them goe by water such a day, and looke about,
and he should see the man that had his basket, and he did
so ; but he would not gett the lost horses, though he was
offered severall angells. He told a woman (his neighbour)
that she laboured under the evill tongue of an ill neighbour
(another woman), which came to her howse, who he sayd
was a witch.

  In J. David Rhesus’ British Grammar, p. 60:—‘ Juxta amnem
(Nant y groes), in agro Maessyuetiano, apud Cambro-brytannos, erat
olim illustris quaedam Nigrorum familia, unde Joan Du, id est,
Johannes ille cognomento Niger, Londinensis, sui generis ortum
traxit : vir certe ornatissimus et doctissimus, et omnium hac nostra
aetate tum Philosophorum tum Mathematicorum facile princeps :
monadis illius Hieroglyphicae et Propaedeumatum aphoristicorum de
praestantioribus quibusdam Naturae virtutibus, aliorumque non
paucorum operum insignium autor eximius.   Vir praeterea ob tam
multam experientiam frequenti sua in tot transmarinas regiones
peregrinatione comparatam, rerum quamplurimarum et abditarum
peritissimus.’

            Notes.

  1 In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 36, Aubrey gives the horoscope, with astrological
notes, e. g. that there is ‘ a reception between Saturn and Luna,’ that ‘ Jupiter is
in his exaltation and lord of the ascendant,’ etc.
  2 In MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6, Aubrey notes :—‘ vide the new additions in John
Dee’s life.’   This perhaps refers to MS. Aubr. 6, foll. 36–38, as being additional
to the paper which he here says he left with Ashmole.
  3 In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 37, Aubrey gives in colours the coat, ‘ gules, a lion
rampant within a bordure indented or,’ adding the note :—‘ Memorandum in

[page 215]

the scutcheon at the beginning of his preface the bordure is engrailed : I believe
that is the truest, for ’twas donne with care—sed quaere.’
  In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 36V he gives in trick the coat for Dee’s match ‘ 1578,
Febr. 5,’ with Jane Fromundz, viz. :—‘in the 1 and 6, gules, a lion rampant
within a bordure engrailed or [Dee] ; in the 2, or, a lion rampant gules
[ . . . ]; in the 3, . . . , a lion rampant crowned sable [ . . . ]; in the 4,
azure, a lion rampant . . . [Dun] ; in the 5, argent, on 2 bends gules 6 cross
crosslets or [ . . . ],’ as the coat of John Dee ; impaling ‘  per chevron ermines
and gules, a chevron between 3 fleur de lys or’ [Fromundz], for Jane Fromundz.
The motto is ‘A Domino factum est istud.’
  4 Aubrey’s conversation with ‘ goodwife Faldo,’ written down at the time
(Oct. 22, 1672), is found in a letter to Anthony Wood, in MS. Wood F. 39,
fol. 192.

[…]
