---
---

[page 609]

[…]

524.  Bernardino de Mendoza to Zayas.
  I have three of your letters, and as you exonerate me from blame
in the delay, I have no more to say on that head, excepting that I
am astonished that my letters should arrive so tardily there, and I

[page 610]

should be very glad to receive orders to forward them by some
other way as I am sure that they will always run the same risk of
delay whilst they go through Juan de Vargas.
  The talk of getting rid of me here has gone no further, and I now
never see the Queen but she tells me bow glad she is for me to be
here.   She gives me audience freely and I have her now in an
excellent humour, thank God, whilst the Englishmen in general are
not bad friends with me, as they think I shall not do anything
against them in the event of disturbance.
  With regard to your request that I should say what is the amount
of money which we may be able to get from the misappropriated
property from the seizures, as I have told you Hatton, the Captain
of the Guard and a Councillor, is the man who has reported the
matter to me, and he will not declare the names of the persons who
hold the property unless a large share of it is given to him ; but I
suspect that it is in the hands of some of the councillors and other men
of position, from whom he expects to get it with the favour of the
Queen, without which nothing can be done.   I do not wish to let
Hatton cool in the matter as he is very warm about it now, from
which I conclude that the sum is a large one.   The amount obtained
might be applied to lighten the expenses of the journey to Monzon
and, having this in view, you may move his Majesty to instruct me
that as soon as the Queen arrives near here I may ask for audience
and beg that commissioners be appointed in conformity with the
agreement, to enquire about this property.   I thank you for pro-
longing the credit, that for the five hundred crowns for extraordinary
expenses being already exhausted, as you will see by my six-
monthly account enclosed, leaving nearly two hundred crowns
owing to me, which I beg earnestly you will have paid and send
me another credit as I can do nothing here without it.
  Antonio de Guaras is still in the Tower. I sent to tell him to
let me know if he needed anything and he asked for two hundred
crowns which were given to him out of the thousand. I never see
the Queen without speaking about his affair.
  As his Majesty in my instructions orders me to try to gain over
some of these ministers, I have made some steps towards doing so
with the earl of Sussex, Lord Burleigh, and James Crofts the Con-
troller, and it has been necessary to give them some hopes of
reward. They ask me every day what reply I receive from Spain,
especially Sussex, and although I answer significantly, yet it is
difficult to keep them in hand very long with words alone.   I am
much confused as I cannot now withdraw from the position I have
taken up, having gone so far, nor can I carry the matter any further
unless means of doing so are sent to me.   If you have a chance
pray mention it to his Majesty, as Don Juan writes that he has
sent to the King about it but has no reply, and in the meanwhile,
orders me to keep the negotiation pending, saying that if he were not
so pressed for money he would send it to me from the Netherlands.
  During her progress in the North the Queen has met with more
Catholics than she expected, and in one of the houses* they found a
great many images which were ordered to be dragged round and

  [note *]: * Euston Bail the seat of the Bookwood family.

[page 611]

burnt. When she entered Norwich large crowds of people came out
to receive her, and one company of children knelt as she passed and
said, as usual, “ God save the Queen.”   She turned to them and
said, “ Speak up ; I know you do not love me here.”
  A very curious thing has happened here lately. A countryman has
found, buried in a stable, three wax figures, two spans high and
proportionately broad ; the centre figure had the word Elizabeth
written on the forehead and the side figures were dressed like her
councillors, and were covered over with a great variety of different
signs, the left side of the images being transfixed with a large
quantity of pig’s bristles as if it were some sort of witchcraft.
When it reached the Queen’s ears she was disturbed, as it was
looked upon as an augury, and great enquiries have been set on foot
about it, although hitherto nothing has been discovered.
  On the 6th instant a ship arrived here from Barbary which had
left Morocco on the 4th ultimo, and brings a very insolent message
from the new king of Fez to the Queen saying amongst other things
that he hopes to send her Stukeley as a present.*
  Walsingham has written to the Queen that the chevallier Lorison
and M. de Bussy,† two of Alençon’s gentlemen, had had a quarrel in
France, and Lorison, to whom the lie had been given, had gone to
Don Juan’s camp and from there had challenged Bussy who was
with his master ; the challenge having been accepted, Bussy had
taken a letter from Alençon to Don Juan saying that he placed
these two gentlemen in his Highness’ hands so that both of them
might came honourably out of the affair, which Don Juan had
promised and given 400 lances for his escort.   I should be glad
indeed to be able to write definitely about Rambouillet’s affairs but
I have not been able to do so as my sources of information are
drying up.   I am writing to Juan de Vargas asking him to send
this letter on with more diligence than the others, which I hope to
God he will as I have not written lately.   This Queen has given
Rambouillet two pieces of gilt plate, some people say of the value of
six hundred crowns, and some of a thousand.—London, 8th Sep-
tember 1578.

[…]

  [note *]: * Stukeley had just been killed whilst fighting against the King’s predecessor who
    had fallen in the same battle.
  [note †]: † Bussy d’Amboise, the famous duellist who was shortly afterwards sent to England
    by Alençon to pave the way for his master’s visit.   He was the close friend of the
    Prince and had fled from Paris at the beginning of the year in consequence of a
    quarrel with one of the King’s gentlemen named Quélus.   A few days afterwards (14th
    February) he contrived the escape of Alençon from the capital and accompanied him in
    his expedition to Flanders.
