---
---

[page 30]

[…]

He was now over forty, and had a natural desire
to range himself and house his library.   Before 1570
he took up his abode with his mother, in a house
belonging to her at Mortlake, on the river Thames.
It was an old rambling place, standing west of the
church between it and the river.   Dee added, to it by
degrees,  purchasing small tenements adjoining, so
that at length it comprised laboratories for his experi-
ments, libraries and rooms for a busy hive of workers

[page 31]

and servants.   Mrs. Dee occupied a set of rooms of
her own.   Nothing of the old premises now remains,
unless it be an ancient gateway leading from the
garden towards the river.   After Dee’s death the
house passed through an interesting phase of exist-
ence, being adapted by Sir Francis Crane for the
Royal tapestry works, where, encouraged by a
handsome grant of money and orders from the
parsimonious James, suits of hangings of beautiful
workmanship were executed under the eye of
Francis Cleyne, a “ limner,” who was brought over
from Flanders to undertake the designs.   At the
end of the eighteenth century, a large panelled room
with red and white roses, carved and coloured, was
still in existence.   Early in the nineteenth century
the house was used for a girls’ school, kept by a
Mrs. Dubois.

Here Dee took up his abode.   Its  nearness to
London and to the favourite places of Elizabeth’s
residence—Greenwich, Hampton Court, Sion House,
Isleworth. and Nonsuch—was at first considered a
great advantage, and the journey to and from London
was almost invariably made by water.   The Queen
desired her astrologer to be near at hand.   When he
fell dangerously ill at Mortlake in 1571, after a
tedious journey abroad into the Duchy of Lorraine
on some mysterious errand, Elizabeth sent down two
of her own physicians, Doctors Atslowe and Balthorp,
to attend him.   Lady Sidney was also despatched
with kind, and gracious, and “ pithy ” messages from
the sovereign, and delicacies, “ divers rareties,” were
supplied from the royal table to supplement his

[page 32]

mother’s provision for the invalid. The Queen seems
to have felt a special obligation to look after him, as
she had sent him on some mission of her own, which
probably we shall not be far wrong in thinking
connected with Dee’s alchemistic experiments. Every
Court in Europe at this time had astrologers and
alchemists in its employ, and the Queen and
Burleigh were as anxious as Dee that he should really
attain the ever-elusive secret of transmutation. Dee
had of course carried the Queen's passport for
himself and a couple of servants, with horses, and
had obtained permits through foreign ambassadors
in London to travel freely through various countries.

[…]

[page 48]

[…]

Dee’s mother surrendered to him on June 15, 1579,
the house and lands at Mortlake, with reversion to
his wife Jane, and to his heirs and assigns after him,
for ever.   The document was delivered to him by a
surveyor from Wimbledon (in which parish Mortlake
was included) under the tree by the church.   The fine
for the surrender—twenty shillings—was paid to the
Queen, as Lady of the Manor, on October 31.

[…]
