---
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0
source_key: "A True and Faithful Relation"
---

[page 1]

Δ. As J. and E. K. ſate diſcourſing of the Noble Polonian Albertus
Laſci his great honour here with us obteined, his great good
liking of all States of the people, of them that either ſee him
or hear of him, and again how much I was beholding to God
that his heart ſhould ſo fervently favour me, and that he doth
ſo much ſtrive to ſuppreſſe and confound the malice and envie of
my Country-men againſt me, for my better credit winning
or recovering to do God better ſervice hereafter thereby, &c.
Suddenly, there ſeemed to come out of my Oratory a Spirituall
creature, like a pretty girle of 7 or 9 yeares of age, attired on
her head with her hair rowled up before, an dhanging down very long behinde, with a gown of
Sey, ……changeable green and red, and with a train ſhe ſeemed to play up and down………
like, and ſeemed to go in and out behind my books, lying on heaps, the biggeſt…………and as
ſhe ſhould ever go between them, the books ſeemed to give place ſufficiently, dis… one heap
from the other, while ſhe paſſed between them: And ſo I conſidered, and ……… the diverſe
reports which E. K. made unto me of this pretty maiden, and ……………
Δ. I ſaid …… Whoſe maiden are you?
Δ. Sh. ……… VVhoſe man are you?
Δ. I am the ſervant of God both by my bound duty, and alſo (I hope) by his Adoption.
A voyce. …… You ſhall be beaten if you tell.
……… Am not I a fine Maiden? Give me leave to play in your houfe, my Mother told me ſhe
would come and dwell bere.
Δ. She went up and down with moſt lively geſtures of a young girle, playing by her ſelfe,
and diverſe times another ſpake to her from the corner of my ſtudy by a great Perſpective-
glaſſe, but none was ſeen beſide her ſelfe.
…… Shall I? I will (Now ſhe ſeemed to anſwer one in the foreſaid Corner of the Study)
…… I pray you let me tarry a little [ſpeaking to one in the foreſaid Corner]
Δ. Tell me who you are?
……… I pray you let me play with you a little, and I will tell you who I am.
Δ. In the name of Jeſus then tell me.
……… I rejoyce in the name of Jeſus, and I am a poor little Maiden, Madini, I am the
laſt but one of my Mothers children, I have little Baby-children at home.
Δ. Where is your home?
Ma.…I dare not tell you where I dwell, I ſhall be beaten.
Δ. You ſhall not be beaten for telling the truth to them that love the truth, to the eter-
nal truth all Creatures muſt be obedient.
Ma. …… I warrant you I will be obedient. My Siſters ſay they muſt all come and dwell with you.
Δ. I deſire that they who love God ſhould dwell with me, and I with them.
Ma. …… I love you now you talke of God.
Δ. Your eldeſt ſiſter her name is Esémeli.
Ma. …… My ſiſter is not ſo ſhort as you make her.
Δ. O, I cry you mercy, ſhe is to be pronounced Eſeméli.
E. K. She ſmileth, one calls her ſaying, Come away Maiden.
Ma.……I will read over my Gentlewoemen firſt.
    My Maſter Dee will teach me, if I ſay amiſſe.
Δ. Read over your Gentlewoemen as it pleaſeth you.
Ma. …… I have Gentlemen and Gentlwoemen, Look you here.
E- K. She bringeth a little book out of her pocket,
……… She pointeth to a in Picture the book.
Mad. …… Is not this a pretty man.
Δ. What is his name?
Ma.……My …… ſaith, his name is Edward, Look you, he hath a Crown upon his head, my Mother
ſaith, that this man was Duke of York.
E. K. She looketh upon a Picture in the Book with a Coronet in his hand
and a Crown upon his head.
Ma. ……This was a jolly man when he was King of England.
Δ. How long ſince is it that he was King of England?
Ma. …… Do you aſk me ſuch a queſtion, I am but a little Maiden? Lo, here is his Father
Richard Plantagenet, and his Father alſo.
Δ. How call you him?
Ma. ……Richard, Surely this was Richard Earle of Cambridge.
E. K. She turneth the book leaves, and ſaid.
Mad.……: Here is a grim Lord, He maketh me afraid.
Δ. Why doth he make you afraid?
Ma. …… He is a ſtern fellow, I do not know him what he is. But this was the Duke of Cla-
rence. This was Father to Richard Earle of Cambridge. Lo, here is Anne his wife.
E. K. Turning over the leafe,
The ſame was heir to all Mortimers lands.
Edmund was her brother.
Lo, Sir, here be the wicked Mortimers.
E K. She turned over diverſe leaves, and then ſhe ſaid
Ma. …… This ſame is Roger Mortimer.
……My Mother ſaith this man was Earl of the Marches.
This ſame is his wife.
He had a great deale of lands by her, for ſhe was an Heire.
This ſame is wild Genvill, her Father.
Here is a Town they call Webley. Here is Beudley.  Here is Mortimers Clybery.   Here is
wild Wenlock.  Here is Ludlow.  Here is Stanton Lacy.   Genvill his wife was Heire of all
theſe. Here is Hugh Lacy her Father. He weareth his haire long, for he was Deputy of Ire-
land; That maketh him look with ſuch a writhen face.
My ſiſter hath torne out the other two leaves, I will bring them when you have ſupped.
I pray do not tell anybody of me.
Δ. We were earneſtly called for to Supper by my folks.

[page 2]

After Supper.
Ma. ……Here is William Lacy Father to Hugh.
Here is Richard his Father. And here is Sir Richard his Father, and here is William, Sir
Richards Brother. Here is his going into France.
Δ. Quo anno Chrifti?
Mad. …… I warrant you my eldeſt Siſter will tell you all. Here is his going into Denmark.
My Siſter will come ſhortly, and tell you how he married in Poland, and what iſſue this Wil-
liam had.
Δ. I pray declare the Pedigree down to this Albert Laſcy.
Ma.…… Alas, I cannot tell whats done in other Countries.
Δ. I know you are not Particular of this Country, but Univerſal for all countries in the
whole world, which is indeed but one Countrey, or a great City, &c.
Mad. …… Well, my ſiſter will ſhortly come and tell you unlooked for, If you judge theſe things
well that I have ſpoken. Nam vera ſunt. Nam verus eſt qui me miſit.
Truth is all that is truth.
The Mortimer I ſpake of, is the firſt of the ſix: there were ſix Mortimers Earles of March.
Edmond was the laſt, and Roger the firſt; that Mortimer was the Grandfathers Grandfather of
this Edmond.
E. K. There ſeemeth ſome one to call her, whom I hear now.
Ma …… I come.
Δ. She took up her Skrolls on the ground, of which ſome were very old, and ſhe put up
her book.
Ma ……… This may ſtand you in ſome ſtead.
Δ. Mitte lucem tuam & veritatem tuam, Jeſu Chriſte, Lux vera,& veritatis perennis Fons,
Amen.

    Richard                             Laſcy.
  Edward       William                     Sir Richard
Dux Ebor.       Laſcy.                         Laſcy.
            France.   Richard.   Peter.         Richard
            France.   Denmark.   Poland.         Laſcy.
               1.        2.          3.
                                                    William Laſcy.

                      Geffrey Genvil.               Hugh Lafcy.
                       Wilde Genvill-
  Rogerus primus comes ═ Joan Genvill.                    Null.
  March.

[page 3]

Monday à Meridie hora 4 ½.
Δ. We preſented our ſelves, ready for inſtruction receiving, and preſumed not to call my
good Miniſter ſpiritual, but by humble prayer referred all to God his good pleaſure.
E K. The Golden Curtain which covereth all the Stone hangeth ſtill,
but I heare a voice or ſentence thrice repeated, thus.
A voice. …… Sanctum, Signatum,& ad tempus.
Δ. The ſenſe hereof may be divers wayes underſtood, and more then I can imagine, but
which ſenſe is to our inſtruction would I faine know.
A voice. …… Sanctum, quia hoc velle ſuum; ſigillatum quia determinatum ad tempus.
E K. Hard ſpeeches, but he could not perfectly diſcern them.
A voice …… Ad tempus & ad tempus (inquam) quia rerum conſummatio. All things are at hand.
The Seat is prepared.
Juſtice hath determined.
The Judge is not yet willing.
Mercy thruſteth it ſelf betwixt the Divinity. But it is ſaid,
The Time ſhall be ſhortned.
E K. Saw no creature: But the voice came behind him over his head,
till now: when he eſpied one ſtanding on the Table beſides the ſilke
cloth on which the Stone ſtood, he ſeemed like a Huſbandman all in red
apparel, red hoſe cloſe to his legs, a red jacket, red buttoned cap on his head,
yea, and red ſhooes. He aſked E. K. how he did, and E.K. anſwered,
Well I thank God.
Δ. By your apparel it ſhould ſeem you have ſomewhat to ſay concerning the Commons
of this Realme, and not of high School-points, or Sciences. I am deſirous to know who ſent
you? What is your meſſage? and what is your name? for a name you  have peculiar as all
Creatures elſe.
Δ. He pauſed a good while; whereupon I aſked him if he conſidered my ſpeeches?
…… I conſider your ſpeeches, for I have left nothing behind.
E. K. He kneeleth down and ſeemeth to ſay ſomewhat, his ſpeech is
quick, round, and ready. He ſeemeth to pray in a ſtrange Language. I per-
ceived theſe words among many other, Oh  Gahire Rudna  gephna oh
Gahire, &c.
His Countenance was directed towards the Stone.
…… Veſtra a non mea facio.
E K. Now he ſtandeth up.
…… Haſt not thou ſaid, From whom comeſt thou? What is thy meſſage? [Δ. He looked to-
ward me] And haſt urged my name? Saying, All things have a name. It is true; for ſo they
have becauſe they are. Haſt thou left any thing unſaid?
Δ. You rehearſe my ſpeeches not onely in general, but alſo in particular.
The will of God be done (to his glory) for the reſt.
……… My meſſage is from him, in whoſe name thou has deſired it, which hath ſaid lift up thine
eyes, and look unto (behold I ſay) the ſum of my Commandments, 1. What I am, 2. Whoſe Mini-
ſters you are, and (as it is ſaid before) 3. To what end and purpoſe it is.
Then ceaſe to plead when Judgement ſtandeth in place; For all things are determined already.
The 7 doores are opened. The 7 Governours have almoſt ended their Government.
The Earth laboureth as ſick, yea ſick unto death.
The Waters pour forth weepings, and have not moiſture ſufficient to quench their own ſorrows.
The Aire withereth, for her heat is infected.
The Fire conſumeth and is ſcalded with his own heat.
The B{o}dies above are ready to ſay, We are weary of our courſes.
Nature would fain creep again into the boſom of her good and gracious Maſter.
Darkneſſe is now heavy and ſinketh down together: She hath builded herſelf, yea (I ſay) ſhe hath
advanced herſelf into a mighty building ſhe ſaith, Have done, for I am ready to receive my burden.
Hell itſelf is weary of Earth: For why? The Son of Darkneſſe cometh now to challenge his
right: and ſeeing all things prepared and provided, deſireth to eſtabliſh himſelf a kingdom; ſay
-ing, We are now ſtronge enough, Let us now build us a kingdom upon earth, and Now eſtabliſh
that which we could not confirm above.
and therefore, Behold the end.
When the time cometh, The …… thy ſorrows ſhall be greater than the ſweetneſſe, the ſorrows
(I mean), of that thou ſeeſt; I mean in reſpect of the ſweetneſſe of thy knowledge. Then will you
lament and weep for thoſe thou thought were juſt men.
When you earneſtly pray it ſhall be ſaid unto you Labor. When you would take Mercy Juſtice
ſhall ſay, Be it ſo.
Therefore (I ſay) thirſt not overmuch: For fear leaſt thy capacity be confounded.
Neither move thou him which hath, moved all things already to the end.
But do thou that which is commanded.
Neither preſcribe thou any form to God his building.
All things ſhall be brought into an uniformal Order.
Whom thou ſayeſt that thou haſt not yet confirmed, confirm with good counſel. It is ſaid I have
accepted him.
Are not theſe News ſufficient?
It is ſaid, He ſhall govern me a people: of himſelf he cannot.  Therefore let him believe, and
ſecondly Rejoyce that the  Angel of God hath ſo governed him.   That in Election he ſhall
govern him a people.
Deſireth he to hear of greater bleſſedneſſe?
He hath alſo ſaid: Then ſhall it be ſaid unto him, O King.
It followeth conſequently that he is called, and that to a Kingly Ofice: For whoſoever is An-
nointed in the Lord, his Kingdom is for ever.
Will he be the ſon of perdition? Let him then with his fathers put on the garments of pride.
Deſireth he news? Tell him thou has prayed for him; the Devil envyeth him, and his eſtate.
Tell him that I ſay ſo.
Say it is a ſhame for a Kings Son to commit theft; and for him that is called, to do the workes
of unrighteouſneſſe. Studieſt thou to pleaſe him? Give him ſharp and wholeſome counſel: For in
him (I ſay) the ſtate and alteration of the whole World ſhall begin.
Wouldſt thou know from whence I came? Thou ſhalt.
But do it Humbly, it is not my part to meddle any further than my charge.
But as it is ſaid before unto thee, So ſhall it come to paſſe.
Moſes had a rod whereby he was known, and tbe hand of God approved.
Let him uſe therefore to carry the rod of righteouſneſſe about him.
For we are ſeven: and in us is comprehended that rod wherewith Moſes wrought. As it is be
gun ſo I end: What ye ſee here is holy [pointing to the …… and by him ſealed and for until the time.
Therefore uſe patience herein until the time that is ſaid unto the ……
Venite, videte, (& loquimini) Judicia mea.
He that ſaith thus (I ſpeak of myſelf, and as concerning my meſſage,) is equal with the great
eſt Angels, and his name is Murifri.
Thou has written my name, and I am of thy Kalender, becauſe thy Kalender is of God.
In the grounds of all thy Tables thou ſhalt finde my name.
Δ. I remember not any ſuch name written by me, but it maybe contained in ſome new
Compoſition, or Collection.
Mur. …… It is true, for if thou hadſt remembred all thoſe things which thou haſt written, then
ſhould not my meſſage need.
Δ. If I might without offending you, I would move two Petitions unto you, one concerning
the Soul, and the other concerning the body: Concerning the Soul, is for one Iſabel Liſter,
whom the wicked Enemy hath ſore afflicted long with dangerous temptations, and hath
brought her knives to deſtroy herſelf withall; ſhe reſiſteth hitherto, and deſireth my helping
counſel, which how ſmall it is God knoweth. The other is of another woman, who hath great
need, and is driven to maintain herſelf, her huſband, and three children by her hand la-
bour, and there is one that by dream is advertiſed of a place of Treaſure hid in a Cellar, which
this woman hath hired thereupon, and hath no longer time of hiring the ſaid Cellar, but till
Midſummer next. She, and this dreaming Maiden digged ſomewhat, and found certain to-
kens notefied unto her: But ſo left off. I would gladly have your help herein, if it pleaſed God.
Mur. …… I anſwer thee, I will come again ſoon, and thou ſhalt receive a Medecine which ſhall
teach thee to work help in the firſt. The ſecond is vanity, for it is not ſo, but to the intent that
after great hope of this world hath infected the weaklings minde: Deſperation might have the more
open and ready entrance. But yet ſhe ſhall be comforted for thy ſake.
Δ. The praiſe be unto God.
Mur. …… I Go.     One thing I have to ſay, be faithfull in all things.
      I have ſaid.
Δ. I prayed, and gave thanks hartily to God for his mercieds, and graces, and ſo roſe up.
Δ. Then he ſaid write, M.49. under V.43. under R.35. 1. and 47. under /F. R. I.\
This ſhal lead thee to my name; he that ſent me be amongſt you. Δ. Amen, Amen, Amen. \9. 33. 42/
Δ. Note in Tabula Collecta, (which I firſt gathered of the 49. good Angels) I took the third
letters out of the names, it is to wit, out of the 49th. name, and th…… 47. 9 33. 42. which
agreed very well with the letters, but the five and thirtieth name did not yield R. in his third
letter. Therefore I am…… in the……

[page 5]

Monday after ſupper 1583.
Δ. After ſupper, as we were together in my ſtudy, and attending ſomewhat the return of
the good meſſager ſpiritual, and ſaid that he promiſed to come again ſuddenly, he appeared
and anſwered.
Mur. …… So I am, write 7. 30.25. 44.37.35 46.
To the firſt S. to the ſecond O. the third L. the fourth G. the fifth A. the ſixth R. the 7th. S.
A. That maketh S O L G A R S.
Mur. …… Add the firſt, and laſt number together, it maketh 53. let that be the Centre to the reſt.
Δ. To be put to the Center of the Steptagonum.
Mur. …… So. The ground hereof is to be found in the third Table in the firſt book: I mean in
the third of the ſeven, the Table of B.B. &c. being the firſt.
My name is alſo to be found in the ſame Table.
Form this upon a plate of lead: It prevaileth as a cure againſt ſuch infections.  My promiſe
is done.
Δ. How is this to be uſed?
Mur. …… Uſe it upon the body moleſted, adding the letters of her name in a ſmall Circle on the
back half, not the letters in their forms expreſſed, but the number of ſuch letters.
Δ. We know not how to number her name in our letters.
Mur. …… Take them out of the ſecond Table (any Table elſe of the Seventh will ſerve) ſo that
thou take the numbers as thou findeth them placed with the letters.
Δ. How is this to be uſed about her body?
Mur. …… As by diſcretion ſhall be thought beſt: It prevaileth ſufficiently, ſo it be done, but thus
far I teach thee, and this, as concerning nature.
The health of him which ſent me be amongſt you, Amen.
Δ. Gloria & gratiarum actio perennis ſit Deo noſtro omnipotenti uni & Trino, Amen.

[...]

Wedneſday a Meridie circa 2d. 1583.
Δ. E. K. Had been ever ſince nine of the clock in the morning in a marvellous great diſ-
quietneſſe of minde, fury, and rage, by reaſon his brother Thomas had brought him news that
a Commiſſion was out to attache, and apprehend him as a fellon for coyning of money. Second-
ly, that his wife was gone from Miſtreſſe Freemans houſe at Blohley, and how Mr. Huſey had
reported him to be a coſener, and had uſed very bitter and grievous reports of him now of late;
and that his wife was at home with her mother at Chipping Norton, whereupon, I conſidering
his great diſorder and incumbrance toward him externally, and his greater offending of God
with his furious impatience internally; and remembring the whole premiſes of God his ſer-
vice to be performed by us two (if we would be dutifull ſervants to his Divine Majeſty)
I was touched with a great pang of Compaſſion, both that any Chriſtian ſhould uſe ſuch
ſpeeches as he uſed, or be of ſo revenging a minde and intent as he ſhewed himſelf to be: and
alſo in reſpect of mine own credit to be brought in doubt, for embracing the company of ſuch an
one, a diſorderly perſon: And thirdly, that the good ſervice of God might hereby be taken
from our two executing, to our great danger, both in body and ſoul: Therefore to do my
duty as a man reſolute (upon our uniting for Gods ſervice) to do for him as for myſelf: I made
God my refuge for comfort, counſel, and help in this great afflicion, and croſſe of tempta-
tion.
Whereupon after my vehement and humble prayers for the foreſaid purpoſe, this voyce
was heard of E. K.
          I had (upon ſome reaſonable reſpect) ſet the ſhew-ſtone with the myſtery in it, on
               the Table by E.K. alſo.
A voyce. …… Let the daughters of light
Take up their garments, let them open the windows of their ſecret Chambers, for the voyce of man
hath ſaid.
Oh, ſhew thyſelf to be a God; yea, perform that which thou haſt already promiſed, ga-
ther your veſtures together, for thoſe that are ſick have need of help, you are the children of pitty,
and in the loins of compaſſion do you dwell: For I have ſaid, you are. And I have ſaid, my Deter-
mination ſhall not fail, although with the ſons of men my Determinations may be undeter-
mined.
Come gather up your garments, for the Cankers are ripe, and the Biting-worm ſeeketh to gnaw
into the Lily.
He hath ſaid, Let me prove them, for they are not juſt: Yea, let me touch them, for they are
unrighteous, I have granted him power, but without prevailing, I have given him weapons, but they
are not ſharpned, his fingers ſhall defile, and yet not deface: For I have appointed him a night, and
have prefixed an end thereunto, to the intent it may be known: That thus far I have ſtretched his
mouth.
E. K. I have heard a voyce about the ſhew-ſtone very great, as though
men were beating down of mud walls.
The thumping, ſhuffing, and cluttering is ſuch,
A voice. …… Ariſe, I ſay, for I will be revenged againſt the ſcorning of thoſe; yea, of thoſe
that are ſucklings.
Δ. After a great ſilence and pauſe, appeared one on the Table (without the ſkirts of
the ſilke ſarcenet) like a woman having on a red kirtle and above that a white garment like
an Iriſh Mantle, on her head a round thing like a Garland, green and like a Coronet under
the Garland, but not perfectly to be diſcerned; on her breaſt a precious Stone of white co-
lour, and on her back another precious Stone; both which Stones were ſet upon a Croſſe, in
the very center of the Croſſe.
Δ. Your external apparel (you Daughter of Light) you perceive that we have ſome-
what noted: but by the power and mercy of the external Light, we truſt and deſire to un-
derſtand ſomewhat of your internal vertue.
She ſaid …… What do you think I am a Jewellers wife by my apparel?
Δ. We deem you to be the Meſſenger of him that hath for mankind purchaſed the Jewel
of eternal Bliſſe, by the incomparable Jewel of his moſt precious Blood.
…… Will you have this too?
Δ. After a pretty while ſilence, I ſaid, We expect the execution of the purpoſe for which
you are ſent.
She ſaid …… It is written that Pride was the firſt offence.
Githgulcag knew not himſelf.
Therefore he was ignorant.
E K. She is much fimbling about the Stone on her breaſt, and re-
garding it.
E. K. Now She talketh with other whom I ſee not, her talke is very
ſhort and quick, but I cannot perceive what ſhe ſaith.
She. …… Read what I have ſaid.
I read the former words.
She. …… You will grant me that Pride is the greateſt ſin.
Pride was the cauſe he knew not himſelf.
Therefore Pride is the cauſe of Ignorance.
Δ. The Argument is good.
She. …… Ignorance was the nakedneſſe wherewithal you were firſt tormented, and the firſt Plague
that fell unto man was the want of Science.
E K. Now ſhe ſpeaketh to other again who appeare not, and they
ſeem to anſwer her again.
She. …… The want of Science hindreth you from knowledge of your ſelf.
E K. She looketh upon Δ. and ſmileth. Now ſhe ſpeaketh to the
unſeen people again.
She. …… Whoſoever therefore knoweth not himſelf, is proud.
Δ. God help us to know ourſelves for his Honour ſake.
E. K. She looketh upon Δ. and ſmileth.
She. …… You have time enough, therefore we may take leaſure.
Δ. [I made ſpeed to write.]
E. K. She talketh again with her inviſible company.
She. …… Pride is rewarded as ſin, Ergo the firſt offender was damned. What ſay you Sir?
[ſpeaking to E. K.]
What difference is between your mind and Pride?
E. K. Wherein am I proud?
She. …… In the ſame wherein the Devil was firſt proud.
Who glorified the Devil?
E. K. God.
Δ. God glorified not the Devil, but before he became a Devil he was in glory.
She. …… The abuſing of his Glorification made him a Devil: So the abuſing of the good-
neſſe of God toward this man, may make him a Devil.
The works of the Spirit quicken; the doings of the Fleſh lead unto deſtraction. Art thou offend-
ed to be called a Devil? Then extol not thyſelf above thy Elction.
No man is elected by proper name, but according to the meaſure of his faith, and this faith is
lively and hath a quickning Spirit in it forever. Indeed thou art ignorant, and therefore thou art
ſufficiently plagued: Why doſt thou boaſt thyſelf and ſay, This I can do?
The Reeds pipe, but it is long of the wind, and herein thou Sheweſt that thou knoweſt not thy ſelf,
for that thou art proud; pray therefore that thou mayeſt have underſtanding, and caſt away pride
if thou wilt not be counted a Devil.
By true underſtanding you learn, firſt to know your ſelves what you are: of whom you are, and
to what end you are.
This underſtanding cauſeth no ſelf-love, but a ſpiritual ſelfe-love.
This underſtanding teacheth no Blaſphemy.
This underſtanding teacheth no fury.
It teacheth a man to be angry, but not wrathful.
For we may be angry, and not offend. Wrath is to damnation.
Therefore conſidering that Damnation was the end of the firſt, which was Pride, and Ignorance,
the puniſhment of the ſecond (which is very loathſome.)
Pray unto God thou mayeſt avoid the firſt, and be unburdened of the ſecond.
Conſider by whom thou art counſelled, and of whom the counſel is: with us there is no cauſe of of-
fence, neither is the counſel given with a weak mouth.
Wilt thou be well rewarded? Why ſtudieſt thou not to do well? Wouldſt thou be one of the cho-
ſen? ſtand ſtiff and be contented with all temptations.
Is God a God of Juſtice?
E. K. It is true.
Be thou therefore a juſt ſervant.
No man inheriteth the Kingdom of Eternity, without he conquer in this world.
No man can challenge juſtly a reward, without he be a Conquerour, or do the workes of Juſtice.
Doth the Devil perſwade thee? Arme thyſelf againſt him.
Doth the World not like of thee? It is for two cauſes; either for that thou liveſt well and not
as a worldling, or elſe becauſe thy wickedneſe is ſuch as that the World wondreth at it. If thou be in
the firſt Rejoyce, For bleſſed are thoſe whom the World hateth; when they laugh at thy godlineſſe,
Be ſorry and grieve thou at their ſinfulneſe.
If thou offend in the ſecond flie haſtily from the World: Tell the World what thou haſt of hers,
and let her be aſhamed that thou knoweſt her.
Is thy fleſh ſtiff-necked? Faſt and pray, it doth avoide temptation.
Be ſorry alwayes; For in this World there is nothing to rejoyce at. For ſin onely provoketh
to forrow, whether it be of thy ſelf or of another.
Be ſtiff againſt temptations, for whoſoever is not armed as I am, ſhall be vexed with the weapons
of his adverſary.
My Garland is Godlineſſe, my Breſtplate is Humility, and upon my back I wear Patience.
Theſe do I wear to the intent I might ſhew you what you ſhould wear.
But as theſe things are placed in their croſsés, ſo do the croſſes alwayes follow them that wear
them.
Art thou puniſhed as an Apoſtle? Rejoyce; it is a happy croſſe.
Art thou vexed as a Tyrant? thank God it is in this world. For bleſſed are thoſe that are puni-
ſhed here, to the intent their ſins may be forgotten hereafter.
I perſwade to the contrary; Be humble, ſeek true wiſdom, then are you truely faſhioned accor-
ding to your Maker, and ſhalt reſt with us, with Halleluja in Heaven.
I have counſelled, I have done my meſſage thus far.
Δ. Your counſel is perfectly good, and your meſſage merciful. His name be praiſed and
glorified that ſent you. Amen.
As you were called hither, by the name of Daughters of Light: So this other day, there
was one ſent hither (of that bleſſed company) who was accounted a Daughter, and had ſix
Siſters more: That Daughter her name was Madini; ſo of your name we are deſirous to be
informed, for diſtinction and inſtructions ſake, in the trade of theſe myſteries.
She ſaid. …… It is good to know my name; to ſee whether it agree with my Doctrine.
E. K. What can you (for all your exhortation) accuſe me of:
Indeed I thank you very heartily for your exhortation and good counſel;
but hovv unjuſtly I am miſuſed at Huſeys hand, and ſo provoked to this
extream affliction of mind and ſundry unſeemly ſpeeches, be you Judge
between Huſey and me.
She ſaid. Whoſoever hath committed ſin and is not reconciled, ſhall have the reward of a ſinner.
There is a double Reconciliation, the one is with God, the other with the Conſcience. But this man
is not reconciled in Conſcience (repenteth not his wi{c}kedneſſe) thereby it followeth he cannot be
reconciled with God: Ergo he muſt be rewarded as he is. The reward of ſin is to be abſent, or ra
ther to be baniſhed in this world from the ſociety of God and his Angels.
So it falleth out to Regions and Countries, Cities, Kings and Subjects, Authorities and their
Officers, when (I ſay) they are eſtranged with abſence of their appointed and good keepers.
Therefore it proved that the Devil is moſt with him, and neareſt with him.
Whom the Devil is a Lord of, he uſeth as his ſervants, and where his ſervice may be greateſt done,
there is he moſt alledged. His ſubtilties are principal and great: And by theſe reaſons I prove that
Huſey is eaſily to be infected, either with envy, malice, ſlander, or diſhonour of Gods word.
This is one of thoſe Aſſaults that is promiſed ſhould aſſault you.
Who is to be blamed, he that conſenteth, or he in whom the procurement is? Thou didſt conſent
and chuſe him for a Companion. Be not therefore angry at his malice; for the fire that is, thou haſt
brought in with thine own hands.
To meaſure the Enemy his induſtry is impoſſible to look into, his ſubtiltie is more incredible.
The Reward of good life is great: But the filthineſſe that ſin carryeth withit in this World,
and leadeth with it into the World to come, is moſt horrible.
Is it not ſaid, That a ſkirmiſh ſhall be (and that great) but you ſhall be Conquerours?
It is written, It is true and ſhall be never overthrown; ſo mighty is his ſtrength that hath armed
himſelf with it.
In the Serpents belly, there is nothing clean: neither with unhoneſt perſons (ungodly I mean)
is there any pure ſociety: Light agreeth not with Darkneſſe, nor vertue with vice, therefore be you
of one, and in one, that you may agree and have the reward of one.
Behold it is ſaid, I will part bounds between the juft and the unjuſt, I will ſuffer the Enemy to
ſowe diſcord to the intent that thoſe that are my people may be ſeparated and have a dwelling by
themſelves.
Peruſe the Scripture, it is alwayes ſeen that the Spirit of God forceth Satan in ſpight of his
head to ſeparate the evil from the good by diſcord, and herein the Devil worketh againſt himſelf.
We good Angels keep ſecret the Myſteries of God; things that are to come we alwayes
keep cloſe with this exception, The form of our Commandment.
Truth it is that a Commiſſion is granted n{o}t onely to enquire of thee, but alſo to attach thee, and
that by the Council.
If he go down he ſhall be attached, therefore tempt not God.
Δ. But if he tarry here and his being here ſo known as it is, it is likely that he ſhall be at-
tached here to my no ſmall grief or diſgrace. What is your counſel herein?
She ſaid. …… It is written miſery ſhall not enter the doors of him whom the Higheſt hath
magnified. DIXIT, & DICO, & DICTUM SIT. The world ſhall never prevaile againſt you.
Δ. In reſpect of the Book, the Scrowl, and the Powder to be communicated, What is your
judgement or mind; ſeeing when he was coming from Iſlington with them, he was threatned
to be pulled in pieces if he came with them to me?
…… All that is ſpoken of, is in very deed, vanity. The book may be uſed to a good purpoſe.
They were wicked ones. But as theſe things are the leaſt part of this action, ſo are they not much to
be looked after.
Δ. As concerning the Powder (I beſeech you) what is your knowledge of it?
…… It is a Branch of Natures life.
It is appointed for a time, and to a purpoſe.
Δ. As concerning the earthes of the Eleven places being with expedition……
What is now to be done with them?
…… It was a foreſight of God, if they had been there now they had utterly periſhed.
Δ. O Jeſus, that is a marvellous thing.
…… Helas, that is nothing.
Δ. By nature they could not have periſhed in ſo ſhort time.
…… I have ſaid.
E. K. Tell us your name.
If you will remember my counſel, I will tell you my name.
E. K. Your counſel was by piece-meale told me, that I cannot remember
it but in general.
…… You do, and have, and I am almoſt H A T H.
Δ. I underſtand you to be A T H, in ſigillo Emeth.
A T H. …… So am I in the number of Gods Elect.
Δ. Shall not I make meanes to Mr. Richard Young, as one of the higher Commiſioners
to do my companion here ſome good?
A T H. …… Trouble your ſelf when you need.
E. K. She ſpake this ſomewhat ſharply.
Get your friends to ſignifie down good report ofyou.
Come not there in many years.
Δ. As concerning my writing of the holy Book, how ſhall I do, by reaſon of the perfect
writing it in the Due Characters? ſeeing many words are written ſo, as the pronunciation
and the Orthographie do hardly ſeem to agree?
A T H. …… You ſhall have a School-maſter ſufficient to read unto you.
Δ. Where ſhall I begin?
A T H. …… Let him lead you to that, who is within you.
Δ. As concerning Iſabel Liſter who is vext of a wicked ſpirit, how well have I executed
that which was preſcribed me; or how well doth it work?
A T H. …… Friend, It is not of my charge.
Remember the true path that leadeth unto true honour, where there ſitteth a True and Juſt
G O D, who grant you his Direction and eſtabliſhment of perfect life.
Δ Amen, Amen, Amen.
E. K. She is gone.

[page 30]

  Thurſday Julii 4. hora 11. ante Meridiem. 1583.
  Note. Δ. When I came home yeſterday from the Court , and from London, and from the
Lord Laſkie, I found that E. K. was purpoſed to ride forth of  Town, and intended to be a-
way (as he expreſly told me) five dayes :  Certain Companions and his acquaintance having
ſo appointed with him, ſome tarrying for him in Mortlucke, and ſome at  Brainford ( as was
perceived this day afterward, and as he confeſſed unto me. )  Whereupon I thought good to
ſignifie ſo much unto the Lord Laſkie who meant to come and refreſh himſelf at my houſe,
as he was wont before ; either this day, or within two or three dayes after :  Who alſo de-
lighted in E.K. his company, &c. Hereupon about the time of E.K. his riſing I wrote theſe
lines, intending to ſend them preſently to the Lord Laſkie, that word might be returned of
his intent before E.K. ſhould ride, I meaning and hoping to perſwade E.K. to tarry ſo long,
and upon ſuch reſpect.

Nobiliſſime Princeps, in reditu, noſtrum Edwardum inveni, facie quidem læta : ſed itineri ta-
men, ut dicit, quinque dierum, ſe accingentem :  Hocque matutino tempore abitum vel iter
iſtud ingredi molitur ; Reverſurus (ut affirmat) poſt quinque dies.  Quid ſit ipſa veritas,
novit ille qui verus & Omnipotens Deus eſt noſter.  Hoc volui, iſto mane ſummo, vobis ſignificare, ut,
quid factu optimum ſit, Cogitetis  : De aliis, ſuo tempore,
                                    Væſtræ Celſitudinis fideliſſimus Clientulus
                                                            Joannes Dee.
        Julii 4. 1563.

This Letter being now written, and not yet folded up , my friend E.K. was ready and
came out of his Chamber into my Study ; and I told him that I was even now ſending word
to the Prince Laſkie of his rideing out, and return after five dayes; and ſo ſhewed him the
Letter : who when he came to the phraſe, Quid ſit ipſa veritas, he was ſamewhat offended,
ſaying,  What ſecret meaning hath this, upon ſome of your two former conference ?  Truly (ſaid
I) even ſuch as the circumſtance of the Letter doth import, that is ; Whereas you ſaid that
you intended to return within five dayes, or at the ſame dayes end, it is uncertain whether
you will, or ſhall, return later or ſooner : and therefore Quid ſit ipſa veritas of your return,
or intent to return, onely God doth know.  He would by no meanes admit that my ſincere
expoſition, but ſeemed ſuſpitious of ſome other undue conſtructions of thoſe former words ;
thereupon I took the Letter and tore it in three pieces, and ſent none : But in my mind re-
ferred all to God, his diſpoſition, aſſuring myſelf of God his moſt conſtant proceeding in his own
affairs.  Shortly after ſaid E. K. to me, Certainly here is a ſpiritual Creature in my right
ſhoulder, who ſenſibly ſaith to me, Come away : So ( ſaid I ) did one ſay to Sowle, when
they would have had him away to have drowned  him, whom I ſtayed in this Study by force,
and ſo hindered the Devil of his purpoſe then ;  as appeareth by that unhappy man yet alive.
Nay ſaid E.K. they have told me that if I tarry here, I ſhall be hanged ; and if I go with this
Prince he will cut off my head, and that you mean not to keep promiſe with me ; And therefore
if I might have a thouſand pound to tarry,  yea a Kingdom, I cannot :  Therefore I releaſe
you of your promiſe of 50 pounds yearly Stipend to me, and you need not doubt but God will de-
fend you and proſper you, and can of the very ſtones raiſe up children to Abraham :  And a-
gain I cannot abide my wife, I love her not, may I abhor her ;  and there in the houſe I am miſli
ked, becauſe I favour her no better.  To theſe , ſuch  his words ſpoken in great pangs and
diſquietneſſe of mind, I repoſed and ſaid, That theſe his doings and ſayings were not of God,
and that by my whole proceeding he might perceive what confidence I repoſed in his dealing
with the ſpiritual, our friends, ſeeing even to the uttermoſt penny (and more than my ability
ſerved unto conveniently ) I laid out ſtill about the ….ming of ſuch things, as were by me to
be done, &c.    Well, on the ſudden, down he went ; upon his Mare, and away toward
Brainford.   After whoſe going, my Wife came up into my Study, and I ſaid, Jane, this man
is mervallouſly out of quiet againſt his Wife, for her friends their bitter reports againſt him
behind his back, and her ſilence thereat, &c.   He is gone , ſaid I, but I beſeech the Al-
mighty God to guide him and to defend him from danger and ſhame ; I doubt not but God
will be merciful to him, and bring him at length to ſuch order ,  as he ſhall be a faithful ſer-
vant unto God, &c.

[page 33]

            Saturday, Septemb. 21.  1583.   Die Sancti Matthæi.
We departed from Mortlack , about three of the Clock after noon : The Lord
Albert Laſky , (Vaywode of Siradiæ, in Polonia) meeting me on the water , as
we had appointed:  And ſo brought night to London ; and in the dead of the night,
by Wherries, we went to Greenwich to my friend Goodman Fern the Pot-
ter his houſe : Where we refreſhed our ſelves, and thither came a great Tylt-
boat from Graves end to take us in, (by appointment of me and Mr. Stanley) to
go to our ſhips , which we had cauſed to ly ſeven , or eight mile beyond Graves
end.

[...]

     To which ſhips we came on Sunday morning by Sun riſe : In the greater of them (being
a dubble Fly-boat of Dennark) my Lord Laſkie, I, and E.K. with my Wife and Children, &c,
went : And in another ſhip (by me alſo hired for this paſſage) went ſome of my Lord his men,
two horſe, &c. that ſhip was a Boyer, a pretty ſhip.  With little winde we ſtraight-way hoyſed
ſayl, and began our voyage in the ſhip.

[...]

  This 22. day we were in great danger of periſhing (on the ſands , called the Spits ) about
midnight : We had (by force of winde contrary) anchored by them, and the Anchor came
home, no man perceiving it, till the ſhip was ready to ſtrike on the ſands. Then, upon great
diligence and pollicy uſed by our Marriners in hoyſing ſayl, and cutting our Cable, (to leave
our ſhore anker) and committing our ſelves to the hands of God, and moſt earneſtly praying for
a proſperous winde : It pleaſed the Almighty , and moſt mercifull God , ſuddenly to change the
winds, which ſerved us to bear fro in the ſands, and to recover Quinborrough, back again.

[...]

  The 23. day (being Munday) we came to the mouth and entrance of Quinburrough Creek , or
Haven.  And as we made to land in ſmall Fiſher-boats, the Lord Laſkie, my Wife and Chil-
dren in one boat, and I, with E. K. Marie , Elizabeth, and John Crokar , in another, it fell ſo
out, that at the ſhips ſide, our Fiſher-boat his ſayl-yard and ſayl  was entangled on the Mayn-
yard of the Fly-boat (being ſtroke down) ſo that, in our ſetting from the ſhips ſide , the top
of our Boat being faſt above, and the windes and ſtream carrying the Boat off below , it in-
clined ſo much on the one ſide, that the one half of the Fiſher boat (well near) was in the wa-
ter, and the water came ſo in (by the intangling before ſpecified , not eaſily to be undone, or
looſed) that my Lord, my Wife, and all that ſaw us thought that of neceſſity our Boat muſt
ſink, and ſo, we to have periſht. But God in his providence and mercy had greater……of
us, ſo that we became clear; the Boat half full of water, ſo that we ſat wet to the knees , and
the water with the billow of the Sea came ſtill beating in more and more : And in this mean
trouble ; one of our two Boat-men, had loſt his long Oare out of the Boat into the water ; and
ſo not onely we lacked the help of that Oare , but alſo by reaſon they would have followed
the winde and ebb, for that Oar, (contrary to our courſe in hand, and not able to become by )
with much adoe we conſtrained them with the ſayl, our one Oare, and the Rudder to make
ſuch ſhift as they could to get to Quinborrough Town : And in the mean ſpace E.K. with a
great Gantlet did empty moſt part of the water out of the Boat, elſe it muſt needs have ſunk by
all mans reaſon. At length (to be brief) we came to the Town ſide, up the crooked Creek: where,
when as the Maſter of our ſhip would have taken me out in his arms ( ſtanding in the water
with his Boots) he fell with me in the water, where I was foul arrayed in the water and Oaſe.
God be praiſed for ever, that all that great danger was ended with ſo ſmall grief, or hurt.

[page 34]

  Thurſday 26. Of September we went to ſhip, and lay in it it all night at Anker.

[...]

    Friday 27. Of September we ſayled from Quinburrough, and ſo by the lands end into the
main Sea, N.E.

[page 35]

  Saturday 28. Of September we fell on Holland Coaſt , and none of our Marriners , Maſter,
nor Pilot knew the Coaſt : and therefore into the Main Sea again , w{i}th great fear and danger,
by reaſon we could ſcarcely get off from that dangerous Coaſt, the winde was ſo ſcarce for t{h}at
purpoſe.

[...]

  Sunday 29. Of September we came into the Briel-haven , and there were like to ſtrike on
ground : at length we came to an Ankor, and lay in ſhip all night.

[...]

  Monday 30. Of September we landed, and went into the Briel.

[page 36]

  Thurſday, Octobris 3. We came from Briel to Roterodam in a Hoy of Amſterdam, to go with-
in land, here we lay all night.

[...]

  Friday, Octobris 4. We came to Tergowd hora 3 à meridie : where we lay within the Town
in the Ship.

[...]

  Saturday, Octobris 5. We came by Harlem to Amſterdam , and lay before the Town all
night in the Ship.

[...]

  Tueſday Octob. 8. We ſailed from Amſterdam to Encuſen, and Edmond Hilton went with
my goods by Sea toward Dansk.

[...]

  Wenſday, Octob. 9. We ſet off from Encuſen early : but by reaſon of a contrary wind, we
came very late into Herlinghem.

[...]

Friday, Octob. 11. We went within land in the little Scutes from Herlinghem ( by Frainker )
to Lewarden.

[...]

Saturday, Octob. 12. From Lewarden, we came to Dockum ( in ſmall Boates ) about 3 of
the clock after noon.

[page 40]

  Tueſday 15. Octob. We made hard ſhift to get from Dockum to Angem by ſun ſet.

[...]

  Thurſdday 17. Octob. We came from Angem to Embden, going without the Iſles , and coming
in at Weſter E{m}b . We came before the Town, by ſix of the Clock after noon : but could not
get in at the Gates, and therefore we lay all night a ſhipboard, but my Lord A. L. went over
to the lodging of the other ſhoar.

[...]

Friday 18. Octob. We came into the Town : My Lord lay at the white Swan toward the
water-ſide, and I, and E.K. with my Children and Many at the three golden Keyes , by the
Engliſh houſe.

[...]

Sunday 20. Octob. This day morning about eight of the Clock we went in a little Hoy from
Embden toward Lyre, my Lord tarried at Embden. We came late to Lyre : and the ſame night
we went from thence in a leſſe Scute by Styk-huſen to Oppen.

[page 41]

Munday 21. Octob. By nine of the Clock in the morning we came to Oppen : a very ſimple
Village, and from thence we went ſtraight way to Oldenburgh.

[...]

Tueſday 22. Octob. From Oldenburgh, by Delmenhurſt, to Breame : and were lodged at an old
Widow{.} her houſe, at the ſign of the Crown.

[page 46]

  Δ. While we were at Bream, among many other things told and delivered to E.K. as he
was by himſelf, by a ſpiritual Creature, I know not who, nor of  how  good eſtate, or what
eſtate he was of :  This parcel among them he held in writing, and imparted to me; And I
thought my pains not ill beſtowed, to keep the ſame in record here.

          Ganilus that, in houſe moſt  fiery fairer than the Sun,
          Hath honour great, faith, give place, your former courſe is run ;
          Therefore firſt framed clouds unknown draw near with mighty ſtorms,
          Wherein ſuch bodies lie obſcur’d, or take ten thouſand forms.
          Your bellies ſtrowing long diſcloſe, and on the harlot earth,
          Seem fair to man, as when the waves as Midwife help … r birth,
          Twice ſhall the Sun put on the heavens, and once look quarter way,
          And working uncouth worlds, build up a City, where men ſay
          The Holieſt ſtood : And Beares bring in uſurping fire at hand,
          And people ſpread return, whoſe new built altars flaming ſtand.
          Whilſt ſuch as ſtrangers were Cateſy cry, and bloody knife,
          With privy ſhame defil’d bekyes, a thing n … ſometime rife.
          From midnight unto noon ,two parts and more ſhall ſlaughter feel,
          And all the World from South, taſte all, down force, of fire and ſteel.
          Small wonder though the earth at ſhadows fighting nothing grieve,
          When mighty Seas ſhall dry, and heavens lie, who can live ?
          That mortal eyes ſhall ſee a Temple built with precious Stones,
          Or Creatures ſtrange made new in ſight, of old and long dri’d bones.
          Or Angels dwell on earth : but I whoſe firy fingers can
          Unlooſe thrice ſealed Books, and utter worlds unknown to man.
          I ſee theſe curſed wights, whoſe borders lead thy journey on,
          Shall with the thirtieth moneth, be bought, or ſold, or fully gone.
           And England periſh firſt with Moths long harbour in her ſkirts,
           The Spaniard loſe their King, and France rebel and fall by Spirts.
           And holy man ten dayes beſieged at home, with theſe dayes whelps,
           Till he at length made free by ſudden force of vertues helps.
          The Poliſh King hath played, and friendly man ſhall then bear ſway,
          Amongſt earthly friends, and ſuch as hope of former faith decay.
          At laſt wear higheſt Crown, if fall from vertue makes no loſſe,
          And midſt this coil to come in ſpace of new come lays or toſſe.
          Then lo, Come other times moſt Holy, and a Kingdom ſhall,
          From Heaven come, and things forthwith  again to Order call.

[...]

  Saturday 2. Novembris we rod from Bream, two great mile to a Nunnery called Oſtarhold.

[...]

  Sunday Novembris 3. we came to Fure or Fureden.

[...]

  Monday Novemb. 4. we came to bed to Harburgh.

[...]

  Tueſday Novemb. 5. we came to Buxtenbaden, and there by 9 of the clock in the morning
we took water in two great Skutes or Boates, Horſe-wagon, and our ſtuff and all, and ferryed
down the little water, till we entred the Elb, and ſo croſſed ſtraight over to Blanken naſen :
there dined, and after dinner by coaches we came to Hamburgh, where my Lord lay at the
Engliſh houſe, and we at another lodging, a widows houſe.

[...]

Wenſday Novemb. 6. we rid to Tritiow 4 mile from Hamburgh, a little Village, having left
my Lord behinde : and alſo miſſing my Children and ſervants , which were gone before us an
other way to my great grief : till by midnight, by ſending out meſſengers to liſten and en-
quire after them, I heard of them. I, my Wife, Rowland, Nurſe, and Myrcopskie, my Lord his
man.

[page 47]

  Thurſday, Novemb. 7. We came to Lubek , aud were there at Inne , at the ſigne of the
Angel, or rather St. Michael , at a Widow her houſe , a very honest Hoſteſſe.

[...]

  Saturday, Novemb. 9. I received Letters from the Lord Albert Łaskie, of the Engliſh mens
ill dealing, and conſulting with the Townſ-men of Hamburgh for my ſtay, and conveying back
again into England, &c.

[page 56]

  Tueſday Decembris 10. After Diner, we removed from Lubek, and the Lord Alb. Łaskie
went by Coach to Lord Chriſtopher, Duke of Meckelburgh.

[...]

  Thurſday night we lay at Wiſmar.         11. Decemb. vel 12.

[...]

Saturday morning we came to Roſtoch.   14. Decembris.

[page 57]

Sonday,  22. Decembris,  Mane, we went from Roſtoch toward Stetin.

[...]

Wenſday, 25. Decembris, on Chriſtmas Day morning, we came to Stetin by  10 of the clock.

[page 59]

  Thurſday, Januarii 9. The Lord Albert Laſkie came to Stetin, Hor. 2½. à Maridie.

[...]

  Fryday, Janurii 10. Μαξίμα{ϛ} {.}ι{υ.}ρια{ϛ} {ν.}ρ{ϐ}ο{..}μ πασσος συμ. Hora prima incipiebat, & per 2. hora
durabat.    Stetini.

[page 61]

  Wedneſday, January 15. we went from Stetin to Stargart.

[...]

  Sonday, January 19.  we came to Poſen.
     Eccleſia Cathedralis Poſnanienſis fundabatur anno 1025. per Winceſlaum Regem Chriftia-
          num factum cujus ſepulchrum in inferiori parte Eccleſiæ extat , lapide egregiè extru-
          ctum.

[...]

  Saturday, January 25. 'Ο χίνδθνοσ θ{.}γαϛ τȣ̃ θανάτȣ δἰα τὐϛ τȣ̃  E. K. ἀδ.ϰίαϛ υ{.}γ{..}λϰϛ ἐνα{.}τίον ἐμ{.}.
(i.e. Magnum ad{ii} vitæ periculum per iniquitatem E. K. contra me.)

[...]

  Sunday, January 26. …… Inviſsebam Bibliothecam Eccleſia Cathedralis.

[...]

  Monday, January 27.      ριξαι χυμ οξορε ϐρενες. ( Rixæ cum uxore breves.)

[...]

  Tueſday, January 28. We went from Poſen.

[...]

  Thurſday, Jan. 30. We came to Konin Town, over the long and dangerous Bridge , with
much cumber at one broken place, by reaſon of the huge Cakes of Ice, which lay there.

[page 62]

  Saturday, Februarii, 1. We paſed the dangerous way of Ice, having 25 men to cut the Ice
for our Coaches to come through above two Engliſh miles long : but for all that great help,
we could not get to Vinew City that night, by reaſon of the great  water  and Ice hard by
the Town, which was broken over the banks into the medows very deep.

[...]

  Sunday, Februarii 2.  We came over the great water, the Ice  being moſt part  ( with that
nights winde) driven away out of  our paſſage.

[...]

  Monday, Feb. 3. We came by Shadek to Lasko Town, and there were lodged in the Pro-
voſt his fair house by the Church.

[page 72]

  Monday, Martii 9. Hora 9. Mane receſſimus a …… & prima nocte fuimus apud Petr……

[...]

  Thurſday, 12. …… At Michow we lodged at night.

[...]

  Friday, Martii 13. We came to Cracow, circa tertiam a Meredie , and were lodged in the
Suburbs by the Church at…… Where we remained a ſevenight, and then ( I and my wife ) we
removed to the houſe in St. Stephens ſtreet, which I had hired for a year , for 80 gylders (of
30 gr.) And Maſter Edward Kelly came to us on Fryday in the Eaſterweek (by the new Gre-
g{o}rian Kalendar) being the 27 day of March, by the old Kalendar : but the ſixth day of April,
by the new Kalendar, Eaſter day being the firſt day of April in Poland, by the new Gregorian inſtitution.

[...]

                    CRACOVIA.   Marti 13.   An. 1584.
  Omnis Honor, Laus, Gloria & Gratiarum Actio, ſit Deo Noſtro Omnipotenti, Trino & uni nunc
& ſemper.   Amen.    Δ.

[page 89]

Sonday,  Aprilis 15.    Mane Hor. 7½.
After a few prayers neceſſary , and invitation to Gabriel and Nalvagé for their inſtru-
ctions.
…… Our inſtructions ſhall grow moſt plentifully amongſt you.   But give place to time, for
this is the voyce of the higheſt.   Be holy and righteous in the works of your hands , and keep al-
wayes the Sabbath of your Redeemer hereafter : For even yet, the Seprent is amongſt us.  For
even yet the Seprent is amongſt my holy ones, and endeavoureth to cut you aſunder.    Therefore
I ſay be holy even in the works of your hands, for he thinketh to prevail againſt you : But let your
houſes be ſwept clean, that when the ſpy entreth, he finde nothing to feed on.
Δ. We ceaſed and gave our ſelves to the Sabbath : conſidering, intending hence foreward
to viſit the Church and Aſſembly, to pray and meditate on God his ſervice.
Solus Jeſus Chriſtus eſt Triamphator contra mortem & Diabolum , Nominus Noſter &
Deus Noſter.    Amen.

[page 91]

Thursday, Circa 9.
As I was in my upper Study , and had gathered the holy words of the second and third
call, and had conferred them with their Engliſh delivered alſo unto us : E. K.  came up the
ſtairs, and so went into his Study, and came out again, and as he was going down the ſtaires I
opened my Study door , and ſaluted him : He thereupon came up again , and came into
my Study : And there I ſhewed him what I had done ; and how I had some under-
ſtanding of thoſe holy words, their ſignifications by reason of due applying the Engliſh
to the word Chriſtus, intending thereby, to have induced E. K.  to like the better of  the
manner of our friends, due, and Methodical, proceeding with us, and told him that unleſſe
of this ſtrange language I ſhould have theſe words delivered unto us Letter by Letter, we might
erre both in Orthography, and alſo for want of the true pronunciation of the words, and di-
ſtinctions of the points, we might more miſſe the effect expected : But as on Tuſsday last , ſo
now again he ſaid, our Teachers were deluders, and no good, or ſufficient Teachers, who had
not in two years ſpace made us able to underſtand, or do ſomewhat : and that he could in two
years have learned all the ſeven Liberal sciences, if he had firſt learned Logick, &c, where-
fore he would have no more to do with them any manner of way, wiſhed himself in England,
and ſaid that if theſe books were his, that he would out of hand burn them , and that he had
written to my Lord (by Pirmis) that he took our Teachers to be deceivers, and wicked, and
no good Creatures of God, with many such ſpeeches, and reaſons (as he thought) of force
to diſwade himself from any more dealing with them : But willed me to uſe John my Boy as
my Skryer, for that these ſpiritual Creatures were not bound unto him,&c. I anſwered unto
all these parcels and reaſons, as time ſerved declaring my perfect truſt in God, that ſeeing I have
many years deſired , and prayed for wiſdome (ſuch as theſe Actions import) at his hands,
and by ſuch means as to his Divine Majeſty ſeemeth beſt, that he would not either miſlike my
prayer, or abuſe my Conſtant hope in his goodneſſe and mercy : Therefore I concluded that
I referred all to the mercifull will of God, and doubted nothing at the length to be ſatiſ-
fied of my requeſt , and prayer made unto him.   So he went from me this ſecond time. …
God lighten his heart with knowledge of the truth, if it be his Divine will and pleaſure.
Note.  Permis went on laſt Wednesday morning , and had received our Letters after
noon, on Tueſday last : But on Monday before the wicked Prince of darkneſſe did what he
could to hinder our proceeding.

[...]

On Thursday, Tabius (brother to my Lord Łaskie his wife) brought news to Cracovia, that
my Lord Laſkie was coming to Cracovia ward.   Emericus came from Keſmarke, and re-
turned back again.    Tabius rode from Cracovia toward Keſmark.

[page 93]

Note on Tueſday after Noon, circa horam quartam, as we two ſat together, E. K. ſaid that
he thought upon the matter, Et quod jam vellet duas horas mihi concedere ſingulis diebus ad reci-
pienda illa, que illi tradere vellent.  Ego autem illi & maximo Deo gratias egi, quia hanc eſſe mu-
tationem dextra excelſi factam verè judicavi ; nam ante prandium rigidiſſimus erat in contraria
opinione & ſententia.

[page 99]

Δ. Remember that on Wedſday night, April the 25. my Lord Albert Laſkie came at night
to Cracovia, and lay in a little woodden building, among guards, by St. Steniſlaus Church : and
on the Friday morning following intended to enter his journey toward Keſmark, and the
recovering of Keſmark : Jeſus proſper his juſt Cauſe.

[page 118]

  Δ. Note, at this preſent was one come, and in the houſe (of whom we underſtood not till
he was gone:) whom the Lord A. Laſkie had ſent to certifie us, that firſt he was in ſome
cumber and hindrance. ſecondly, how Fabius (his brother in Law) and another had given
him counſel, very raſhly  to proceed: But leaving that. Thirdly, by the gap and open way
with eſtate of the Commons, or Citizens, by their great Zeal, and favour that he obtained
his purpoſe. This (in effect) we underſtood at the Meſſager his return after noon.   Which
marvellous exactly did anſwer to the former ſhew.

[...]

  Remember that on Saturday after noon, the Chancelour came to Cracow , with 60 Coaches
in his Company and train : he bringing in a  cloſe Coach  (covered with red) the Lord Sa-
muel S. Boroskie Priſoner, whom he took on Friday night before , at his ſiſters houſe, being
ſeparated from his Souldiers and ſervants, &c.

[page 158]

  Δ. Becauſe E. K. came not, ( according as it was bidden yeſterday ) to follow the Acti-
on : I went to his Study door, and knocked for him :  And I requeſted him to come ; and
he refuſed ſo to do, and gave me a ſhort and reſolute anſwer,  That he would never more
have to do with theſe Actions.   I aſked him the reaſon why :  He would give none :  But
earneſtly denied to proceed.   I told himthat his words * yeſternight ( that he could not
this day deale ) did very much grieve me, &c. whereof he made ſmall account.  So I went
into my Study again, and committed the Cauſe to God.
After half an hour and leſſe, he came ſpeedily out of his Study, and brought in his hand
one Volume of Cornelius Agrippa his works , and in one Chapter of that Book he hread the
names of Countries and Provinces collected out of Ptolomeus ( as the Author there noteth )
Whereuppon he inferred, that our ſpiritual Inſtructors were Coſeners to give us a deſcription of
the World, taken out of other Books : and therefore he would have no more to do with them.
I replied, and ſaid, I am very glad that you have a Book of your own, wherein theſe Geogra-
phical names are expreſſed, ſuch as ( for the moſt part ) our Inſtructors had delivered unto
us : and that, according to the Tenor and form of my requeſt to him, ſo to hav{e} them ex-
preſſed : for our more perfect information, by thoſe known names ; to underſtand thoſe 91
unknown and unheard of names, of ſeven letters every one :  whereby they (our Inſtructors I
mean) are very greatly to be thanked, and to be deemed (in all reaſonable mens judgements)
moſt friendly, and far from coſenage, or abuſing of us : And farther I ſaid, that my ſelf, had
here ſet down on a paper, all the 91 names together orderly, as we received them, and thnat
I had here brought the deſcription * Geographical of the whole earthly Globe: and alſo
Pomponius Mela ſet forth in Engliſh with the Chartes thereunto belonging, fairly deſcribed
by hand : To the intent he might ſee the verity of their words yeſterday delivered unto us :
for the performance of my requeſt made to them, on Tueſday  laſt in this form of words, as
the Book hath it recorded thus ;
   Δ. As you gave us a taſte, or warning of Italia and Britania, ſo, if it be thought good
   to you, we are deſirous to underſtand of the reſt ,  the Application to ſuch names as we
   underſtand.
Whereby you may perceive ( ſaid I to E. K. ) how your reaſon is marvellouſly confounded
by your wilful phantaſie :  For ſo much as, wherein you would find fault, in our ſpiritual
Inſtructors doings, Therein they have done that which I requeſted them : as appeareth ; and
that to the intent, of known Countries we might underſtand which Angels had the govern-
ment : for ſuch purpoſes, as occaſion might offer or require our practices to be tryed in.
This ( quoth I ) is to groſſe your error, and to wilful your wrangling :  But I do in nar-
rower points peruſe and conſider their words and doings ; In which though ſometimes my
writings ( after your declaration ) hath been amended by them, yet the occaſion of miſwrit-
ting for the moſt part, hath been either in your miſreporting what you ſaw and heard, or
in my wrong hearing, or writing : and ſometime by the ſpiritual preſent correcting of my
writing, and ſometime longer after, &c.
But for all this, E. K. remained of his wilful intent ; and ſo departed to his Study again :
And I committed God his Cauſe, into his own hands, care and ordering, as may be beſt for his
honour and glory.  So be it.

[page 171]

         Junii, 22, 23.                  Note.
  On Friday, and eſpecially Saturday, E. K. had great  Temptations not to credit  this
Action, and was ſaid unto by a voice, how our Inſtructors would uſe cavillation of our diſ-
ordered life, to forſake us, and not to perform, according to our expectation of the former
promiſes to be performed by them.
  A voice ſaid, likewiſe, to him, that A. L. ſhould not go to the Emperours Court, for lack
of money : for he ſhould get none here.  Likewiſe, it willed him to go up into his Study
and he would ſhew him all the effect of our Inſtructions received.  E. K. complained to me
how he was thus greivouſly moleſted by ſuch means and almoſt brought in deſpair. But I com-
forted him as well as I could ( my ſelf being inwardly, moſt ſorrowful ) and made my moane
to God by prayer when I was alone : for him, and our Cauſe.  Moreover he could not be
perſwaded by me that good Angels would undertake to help us to any relief by money or trea-
ſure : affirming that it appertained to the wicked ones : ſeeing they were the Lords of this
World ; and the kingdom of God was not of this World, &c.  .... Said, that the wicked were
in the world, and of the world : but the Elect were in the world, but not of the World.
  Si de Mundo eſſetis, Mundus quod ſuum eſt diligeret :  quia vero de mundo non eſtis ſed ego elegi
vos de mundo, propterea adit vos mundus.
  Ergo dedi eis ſermonem tuum, & mundus eos odio habuit, quia non ſunt  de mundo, ſicut & ego
non ſum de mundo.  Non rogo ut tollas eos de mundo, ſed ut ſerves eos à malo. De mundo non ſunt:
ſicut & ego non ſum de mundo, &c.
  To be of the world, was to be in love with the trade of the vanities of this world, and to
follow them:  And that money and riches were things indifferent: good, if they were well
uſed ; and evil, if they were evilly uſed : And that, Bonis omnia cooperabantur ad bonum ;
Therefore the godly (as the Patriarchs and many nowadayes) might have money ; but to
uſe, not abuſe it : and that ſuch is our caſe and neceſſary requeſt to God, &c.

[...]

             Sunday, Cracovia, Junii 24. à Meridie horam circiter tertiam.
  Δ. Note, while at my lodging ( by Saint Stephens ) I was writing the Note, ( on the page
going next before ) of the Tentations of Friday and Saterday : E.K. was at my Lord A.L.
his lodging ( at the Franciſcan Fryars, where he lay at Phyſick ) and at the ſame time , this
happened, as followeth ;
  As my Lord A. L. and E. K. ſate together, conferring and conſulting of our affairs , of
Gods mercies, and of ſundry tentations of the ſpiritual enemy, and  afterward,  as the Lord
A. L. was reading Rofenſis pſalm. de Fiducia in Deum, ſuddenly, upon E. K. his right ſhoulder,
did a heavy thing ſeem to ſit, or reſt, whereof he told the Lord A. L. And afterward was this
voyce uttered by that Creature in Latine.
Laſky, veniet tempus, cum tu portabis verſum ſedecimum, illius   Pſalmi undecimi, in vexili tuo,
& vinces inimicos tuos.
  Then A. L fought in Davids Pſalter for  the eleventh Pſalm, and ſixteenth verſe thereof:
and while he was ſo about that Pſalm, The voyce ſaid that he meant not that Pſalm of Da-
vid, but the eleventh Pſalm of Roffenſis : which Pſalm  the Lord A.L. was then in reading to
E. K{.} and was about the verſe, Hic labor ac dolor, &c. being the ſixth verſe.
  By and by after, the voyce ſaid in Engliſh.
                            ⸺ Truſt thou in God.
  Hereupon the Lord A. L.  did read forth that Pſalm of Roffinſis, and when he came to the
ſixteenth verſe thereof, being
          Si ambulavero in medio tribuletionis, me cuſtodies adverſus inimitos tu ...
          Manum tuam extendes, & dextera tua me ſalvabis.
  Thereupon the voyce ſaid : Put to the firſt line of the next verſe : And that was Domine tu
omnia pro mie perficies.
  And as he would have read further, the voyce willed him to ſtay at thoſe words, and ſaid
as followeth :
  ⸺ I ſwear unto thee by the true and living God, that this ſhall come to paſſe.
  Then E.K. ſaid unto the Creature : In the name of God, Who art thou ?  And he an-
ſwered in Latin, and ſaid ,
  Ego Sum AV E, cras plura audietis.
            Δ. Gloria, laus, honor & gratiarum actio perennis ſit Deo Noſtro, omtpotenti
                & Miſericordi.  Amen.

[page 182]

  Note. About seven of the Clock this afternoon, E. K. came again up into my study: and
seing me reading, and considering this Action, began to finde talk of it, and willed  me to as -say
the practise of it if I understood it: And, to be brief, by little and little fell to this issue,
that he confessed himself to be very sorry that he was so far raging in words as h{i}s was this
day.  Nay, (said I) any man living, else, would have found just cause of comfort, and to give
thanks for AVE, {su}ch speeches to him, as he  used  unto you upon true compassion, and no
skoff, &c. B{u}t you by and by called him Devil, and raged on f{u}rther against Michael and Ga-
briel, and the heavenly powers wi{t}h most horrible speeches,&c. He became very penitent, and ac-
knowledged that he had offended God: and said, that  surely it was of the Devil, for he did not
remember his words: but he is sure that they were not decent, and beseeched God to forgive
him: And so did I, and was very glad of this his reforming himself, and we (being oft (be-
fore) called down to supper) were going out of my Study: and as he was almost at the door
to go out, he said to me, I feel  a very heavy thing upon my shoulder: and it is warm with a{l}l:
Whereat I put to the door, and we sat down again: Verily thinking (as it was) that it was
the presence of AVE, whereupon I said into the Creature.
  A. In the name of Jesus, Ave art thou there, he answered immediately after as followeth.
  Ave…… Because thou [E.K.] ha{th} acknowledged my honour again: I will also acknowledge my
help toward you: But where  man curseth the Heavens, what {ho}ly Creature can abide?   Or
where Satan is brought into possession, by free will of man,  what good  Angel is he that depart;
eth not?
  A. O Lord, confirm thy mercies {u}pon us from henceforth.
  Ave. ……As concerning your Action, The Heavens bear witnesse of it.
Yea, yesterday did the good Angels contend with the wicked: and there
was a great conflict betwixt them; and that about the love of God towards
you, and your Action.    But I will visit you again in the morning, and
will perform my good will in God toward you.    But th{o}u must pray often
if thou wilt avoid temptation.     God be mercifull to you, forgive you, and
strengthen you to the end.
  A. Amen, sweet Jesu, Amen.
  A. When all was thus ended, I delivered to E.K. my Psalter book (with the short prayers
annexed to every Psalm) where he himself very devoutly, and penitently prayed three of
them, and I hearing also of them, gave my consent in heart to the same prayers.
  A. To God onely be all praise, honour, and glory, now and ever.   Amen.

[page 197]

            Monday, Julii, 9. Manè hora 7. three quarters, ✝ Cracoviæ.
Orationibus quibuſdam finitis ad Deum & deindead Gabrielem & Nalvage, &c.
  E. K. As ſoon as he looked, he found the Stone covered with the
white Curtain.
  Δ. A pauſe of a ¼ of an hour : In which ſpace I uſed ſundry ejaculations to God, and his
good Angels.
  Δ. This day was appointed, we attend therefore your inſructions.   At length they ap-
peared not, but uſed a voice.
  A voice. …… This day, but the Sun declining the fourth hour.
  Δ. Your meaning is, that at afternoon, at 4 of the clock.
  The voice. ……As thou haſt written ⸻
  Δ. The will of the Higheſt be done.     Amen.

[page 198]

              Wedneſday, Julii 11.   Mane hora, 6 ½.     Cracovie.
          Oratione dominica finita, &c.
Δ. We await the promiſe, which you made us , O Gabriel.
A voyce. Not now, but at the fourth hour, declining as before.
E. K. And why not now as well ?
A voyce. He that laboureth in his own harveſt laboureth when he li{f}t : but he that fiſheth on the
Sea, muſt be ruled by her {c}ourſe.
Δ. Fiat voluntas Dei.

[page 210]

  1584.    Remember that on Saturday, the fourteenth day of July, by the Gregorian Calen-
der, and the fourth day of July, by the old Calender, Rowland my Childe (who was born
Anno 1583. Ja{nu}ary 28.  by the old Calender) was extreamly ſick about noon, or midday,
and by one of the Clock ready to give up the Ghoſt, or rather lay for dead, and his eyes ſet
and ſunck into his head, &c.
  I made a vow, if the Lord did foreſee him to be his true ſervant, and ſo would grant him
life, and confirm him his health at this danger, and from this danger I would (duriug my life) on Saturdayes eat but one meal, &c.

[...]

  Remember on Wedneſday night the eighteenth of July, as I walked alone about nine of the
Clock in the evening, in the Chamber before my Study, (above) in divers places of that
Chamber appeared flaſhes of fire, and did not lighten abroad.

[page 212]

                               A N N O  1584.
  On Wedneſday the firſt day of Auguſt, at afternoon (hora 3.) we entred on our journey to-
ward Prage, in the Kingdom of Beame, whither we came on thurſday ſevenight after, by three
of the Clock, that is exactly in eight dayes.
We came by Coach, I, E. K., and his brother, and Edmond Hilton, ſo that we came to
Prage Auguſti 9. by the new Calender: but by the old July 30, two dayes before Auguſt the
old Calender.
Miſerere Noſtri Deuſ Noſter neque in eternum iraſcariſ nobis.

[...]

                        P R A G E   1584.
  Auguſti 15.   Wedneſday, we began on the day of the aſſumption of the bleſſed Virgin Mary:
in the excellent little Stove , or Study of D. Hageck his houſe lent me, by Bethlem in old
Prage : Which Study ſeemed in times paſt (Anno 1518.) to have been the Study of ſome Stu-
dent, or A-- ſkilfull of the holy ſtone: a name was in divers places of the Study, noted in letters
of Gold, and Silver, Simon Baccalaureus Pragenſis, and amont other things manifold written
very fairly in the Study (and very many Hierogliphical Notes Philoſophical, in Birds, Fiſhes,
Flowrs, Fruits, Leaves, and ſix Veſſels, as for the Philoſophers works) theſe verſes were over
the door.
                    Immortale Decus par  gloriaque illi debentur
                    Cu{ju}s ab ingenio eſt diſcolor hic paries.
  And of the Ph{i}loſophers work (on the South-ſide of the  Study) in three lines, uppermoſt
was this written.
  Candida ſi rubeo  mulier nupta ſit marito : Mox complectuntur , Complex aoncipiuntur.   Per ſe
ſolvuntur, per ſe quandoque perficiuntur : Ut duo que fuerant, unum in corpore fiant : Sunt due res
primo, Sol cum Luna, tamen in imo, Confice, videbis, fit ab hiis lapis quoque Rebus.
  Lunæ ptentatū, peregit Sol R{e}bis actu : Sol adit Lunam per medium, rem facit unam.  Sol
tendit velum, tranſit per ecliptica Cœlum : Currit ubi Luna recurrit hunc denno ſublima.  Ut ſibi
lux detur , in ſole quæ retinetur.  Nec abiit vere , ſed vult ipſi commanere : illuſtrans certe de-
functum corpus aperte : Si rebus ſcires, quid eſſet tu reperires. Hæ{c} ars eſt cara, brevis, levis atque
rara.  Ars noſtra eſt Ludus puero, la{b}or mulierum ; ſcitote omnes filii artis hujus, quod nemo poteſt
colligere fructus noſtri Elixiris, niſi per introitum noſtri lapidis Elementati, eſti aliam viam querit,
viam nunquam intrabit nec attinget.   Rubigo eſt Opus , quod ſit ex ſolo auro , dum intraverit
in ſuam humiditatem.   And ſo it ended.

[page 213]

    Auguſti 15. incœptus ad Omnipotentis Dei Laudem,  Honorem,
                       & Gloriam.   Amen.

Δ. Fieri poteſt, quod anni 1588, & aliorum ſupputatio, initium ſuum ha-
bent ab ipſa die Paſſionis Chriſti vel Aſcenſionis in Cælum.  Atque
hac ratione, 33, vel 34. anni plures conſiderari debent : quia tot an-
norum Chriſtus erat tempore ſuæ paſſionis, vel aſcenſionis : Addas
igitur annis 1588, 34. & inde emergunt anni 1622. atque iſte nume-
rus propius accedit ad tempus annorum diluvii &  Arcæ, cujus fi-
militudinem fore  circa  ſecundum  Chriſti adventum Scripturæ
docent :
  Vel, cum poſt creatum Adamum, Anno Mund. 1655, Diluvium
Aquæ,  omnia deleverit  viventia : Poſt Chrifti, ( noſtri Adami
ſpiritualis ) reſtitutionem in Cælum, Anno 1655 ( qui erit anno 1688. ) expectamus Dilu-
vium ignis, quo omnia ſunt Immutanda :  vel Charitatis  &  ardoris Chriſtiani magaum futu-
rum ſpecimen.

  Non faciet Dominus DEUS verbum, niſi revelaverit Secretum  ſuum ad ſervos ſuos, pro-
phetas. Leo rugiet, quis non timebit? Dominus Deus loquutus eſt : Quis non prophetabit ?
                          Amos, Cap. 3. B.
  Nihil mali invenimus in homine iſto :   Quid ſi ſpiritus locutus eſt ei, aut Angelus ?   Act.
Apoſt. Cap. 23. C.

  Dico enim vobis, quod multi Prophetæ, & Reges voluerunt videre, quæ vos videtis, & non
viderunt : & audire quæ auditis, & non audierunt.   Luce 10. E. Matthæi 13. B.

  Chariſſimi, nolite omni Spiritui credere : Sed  probate  Spiritus ſi ex Deo ſint : quoniam
multi pſeudoprophetæ, exierunt in mundum.   In hoc cognoſci{t}ur Spiritus Dei.   Omnis Sp-
ritus qui conſicetur Jeſum Chriſtum in carne  veniſſe, ex Deo e{s}t, &c.   Johannes Epitola {t}.
Cap. 4. A.
  Quiſquis confeſſus fuerit, quoniam Jeſus eſt filius Dei, Deus in  eo manet, & ipſe in Deo,
&c.   Cap. eodem C.

                    Paulus ad Corinthios, Epiſtola, 1 Cap. 1. b.
  Gratias ago Deo meo ſemper pro vobis, in gratia Dei, quæ data  eſt  vobis in Chriſto Jeſu,
quod in omnibus divites factis eſtis in illo, in omni verbo & onmi ſcientia  ( ſicut teſtimonium
Chriſti confirmatum eſt in vobis) ita ut nihil vobis deſit in ulla gratia, Expectantibus revela-
tionem Domini noſtri Jeſu Chriſti, qui & confirmabit vos uſque in finem fine crimine, in die Ad-
ventus domini noſtri Jeſu Chriſti.  Fidelis Deus per quem vocati eſtis in Societatem Filii ejus
Jeſu Chriſti Domini noſtri, &c.
  Δ. Noto Revelationem & adventum Chriſti ſecundum : deinde  confirmationem  quæ re-
ſpicit alium adhuc finem temporis : unde de Regno Chriſti hic in terris, ſecundum Joannis Apo-
calypſim, videri poſſit hic locus aliquem præbere guſtum, &c.

                      Paulus ad Corinthios, Epiſt. 1 cap. 1. D.
  Quæ ſtulta ſunt mundi, elegit Deus, ut confundat ſapientes : & infirma mundi elegit Deus{.}
ut confundat fortia :  & ignobilia mundi, & contemptibilia elegit Deus, ea que non ſunt ut
ea quæ ſunt deſtrueret, ut non glorietur omnis caro in conſpectu ejus.  Ex ipſo autem vos
eſtis in Chriſto Jeſu, qui factus eſt nobis ſapientia à Deo, &  Juſtitia , &  Sanctificatio & Re-
demptio.  Ut, quemadmodum ſcriptum eſt.  Qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur.
                      Paulus ad Corinthios, Epiſt. 1. cap. 2. C.
  Nobis autem revelat Deus per Spiritum ſuum : Spiritus enim omnia ſcrutatur, etiam pro-
funda Dei, &c.  Vide præcedentia & ſequentia in eodem capite.

[page 218]

              Friday, Auguſti 17.   Mane.           ✝ Pragæ.
  Δ. Becauſe I would make no delay, for the Letter writing to the Emperour Rodolphus , I
framed my ſelf to write, beſeeching God that I might ſo write, as might be ſufficient for the
purpoſe,&c. And thus I wrote as followeth.

[...]

  Omnipotentis Noſtri Creatoris ( Chriſtianorum omnium Imperatorum fæliciſſime , O Ru-
dolphe) tam eſt hominibus incognita illa , quæ cuncta diſponit perficitque P R O V I D E N-
T I A , rataque ipſa rerum ſeries & coordinatio (à primo ad ultimum) quòd à pleriſque, te-
merè, fort{u}ito, vel caſu, hoc illove evenire modo, exiſtimentur omnia, quæ extra præterve ſuo-
rum Conſilior{u}m de{ſi}gna{t}iones, fieri conſpiciant. Verùm quibus eſt mens Divinæ veritatis lu-
mine colluſtrata, & ad multiplices longiſque intervallis diſtinctas rerum conſecutiones conſide-
randas, a{tt}entio{n}, evidentiſſimè deprehenden{.} illi quidem, Quæ, quibus præcurriſſe , tanquam
cauſas, occaſioneſq{u}e neceſſarias, alio priori, & interdum longe diverſiſſimo, tempore, oportue-
rat.  Atque ut varietatem nunc omittam exemplorum, (quæ, ex aliorum hominum inter ſe
collatis vicis, conditionibus, factiſque adferre poſſim,) Exemplum ſatis conſpicuum hoc uni-
cum fieri poſſi{t} : N{i}mirum illa, (incredibilis ferè) quæ inter ſacram Cæſaream Majeſtatem ve-
ſtram , & humillimum (in Deo) Mancipium me veſtrum  (ex multiplicibus utrinque præcur-
rencibus occaſionibus ) jam quaſi inſtare videtur, In un{u}m (idemque admirandum quid) Com-
binatio, Divinaque conſpiratio.   Ambiverunt me (Juvenem) Illuſtriſſimi Imperatores duo :
Victorioſiſſimus ille Carolus Quintus, & ejuſdem Frater Ferdinandus, veſtræ Cæſareæ Majeſtatis
Magnificentiſſimus Avus.  Hic, Poſonii, Hungarie : ille verò, Bruxellæ, Brabantiæ. Hic, An. 1563.
Ille autem, Anno 1549.  Aſt clementiſſimum Imperatorem Maximilianum , Cæſareæ veſtræ Ma-
jeſtatis Patrem (Immortali glora dignum) jam tum Hungariæ coronatum Regem, (invitiſſimo
quidem ipſo Tyranno Turcico) eodem in Poſonio, eodemque, Anno 63. in deliciis habere cœpi:
illi{ſ}ſque rariſſimas virtutes, cum fideliter colere, tum poſteritati eaſdem reddere commendatiſſi
mas, opere quodam conabar Hieroglyphico. Quo etiam in labore exantlan-
do, animus mihi præſagiebat, Auſtriacæ * familiæ; alium fore aliquando ali-
q{u}em, in quo maxima mea ſpes, & publico Chriſtianorum ſtatui, Res, con-
firmaretur, (vel confirmari poterit,) Optima, Maximaque. Veſtræ igi-
tur Cæſareæ Majeſti, Imperatorum Romanorum (ex Auſtriacorum Principum nobiliſſima fami-
lia) mea ætate {fl}orentium, Q U A R T O : Adſum, & ego, Triplicis Alphabeti, litera * Quar-
ta.  Atque ita adſum, ut me ipſum ad pedes Cæſareæ Majeſtis veſtræ demiſsè oſculandos offe-
ram : plurimùm gaviſurus , fi qua in re , Chriftianæ Reipublicæ Imperatori tanto, talique, gra-
tus, utiliſve eſſe potero.

                                                       Veſtræ ſacræ Cæfareæ Majeſtati, ſoli, ſi hæc
        Superſcriptio erat hæc.                         aliquandi u conſiare patiemini (neminique
  Sereniſſimo ac potentiſſimo Principi ac Domino Do-    detegere velitis )  rem facietis valde ne-
mino Rudolpho, Dei Gratia Romanorum Imperato-           ceſſariam.
riſemper Auguſto, ac Germaniæ ,Hungariæ, Bohe-             Pragæ, An. 1584. Auguſti 17.
miæ, &c. Regi, Archiduci Auſtriæ, Duci Burgun-                     Cæſareæ Majeſtis Veſtræ
diæ Stiriæ Carinthiæ, &c. Comiti Tyrolia, &c.                     Humillimus & fideliſſimius
Domino meo clementiſſimo                                             Clientulus

                                                                        Joannes Dee.

[page 225]

                    Friday, Auguſti, 24. à Meridie.     Pragæ.
  Being willed to deal with Rodolphus, firſt by letter, and then by ſpeech :   I thought good
to ſend the Letter before written, for  the Emperour ; by the Noble Don wilhelmo de St.
Clemente, the King of Spain his Præfectus Negotiorum with this Emperour : and thereupon by
Emericus Sunttag, the Lord Laſkie his Secretary, I wrote this to the aforeſaid Don Clemente,
and ſent it this Bartholomew Day.

[...]

Ea eſt hominum in terris conditio (Nobiliſsime vir ) ut ſibi foli nullus natus eſſe videatur :
Immò neque ſibi ullus omnia ſponte naſcentia, vel ultro ab aliis oblata, quæ ſibi maximè
ſunt neceſſaria, recipiat.  Mutuæ inde hominum emerſerunt ſocietates, mutuæ amicitiæ,
mutuæ operæ, Mutua dona, Rerum commutatio, & empti{o}nis, rerumque venditionis contra-
ctus : Aliique diverſi hominum exiſtunt ſtatus, unde hominum inter homines, & cum homi-
nibus multiplicia procurantur officia, commerciaque.   Neque omnium iſtorum, ſola eſt utilitas
vel ( quæ peribit ) voluptas, ſcopus ille, vel finis, quem attingere conantur & ſtudent : Sed
aliud aliquibus eſt propoſitum, quod Divin{i}us quidem eſt, quod virtutem vel Honeſtatem no-
minare poſſumus ; quæ cælicus demiſſa, hominum informet mentes & orner, ſibique coaptet :
Adeo ut ſedibus illas reddat celeſtibus dignas.   Illud, illud, ergo eſt Illuſtriſſime vir quod
excellentiam veſtram tam mihi pridie reddidit attentam, benignam & perhumanam ; Illud eſt
quod veſtram refricabit memoriam, & veſtrum inſigniter acuet ingenium, in Cauſa mea, ſuæ
Cæfareæ Majeſti tam proponenda, quam commendanda : eoque tractanda modo, quo illa
tractari Arcana debeant, quæ a paucis credantur , & a paucioribus intelligantur : veriſlima
licet ſint, & ex ſeſe utiliſſima.  Quo citiùs Cæſarea ſua Majeſtas, mirabilem hanc & maxi-
mam Dei, non Providentiam ſolum, ſed bonitatem etiam amplexus fuerit, eo citius & abundan-
tiùs, meæ ad illum legationis conſtabit ſinceritas, bonitas & utilicas.  Voluiſſem equidem
hunc incluſuni libellum, literaſque incluſas veſtræ excellen{t}iæ, ipſemet attuliſſe. Sed ( cum
venia ſit dictum ) ex digiti pedis mei offenſa cuticula, non tam commodè poſſum hodie pedes
venire.  Proinde amico meo hoc onus impoſui, ut ( cum veſtræ Excellentiæ manuum deoſcu-
latione ) omnia mea vobis offerat ſervitia : hocque, quicquid eſt, pro ſua Cæſarea Majeſtate,
traderet munuſculi.
                                                      Pragæ 24. Auguſti 1584.
The Superſcription of this Letter was thus,                 Joannes Dee.
Illuſtriſſimo Domino, Domino Don Gulielmo de Sancto
Clemente ſereniſſimi atque Catholici Hiſpaniarum Re-
gis Negotiorum apud ſacram Cæſaream Majeſtateni, &c.
Præfecto, Domino meo Obſervandiſſimo.

[page 228]

  Note.  At noon, this day I received Letters from the Lord Łaskie , from my wife, and from
my brother Nicolas Fromonds in England : how Mr. Gilbert, Mr. Sled, Mr. Andreas Firmorshem,
my Book-seller, used me very ill in divers sorts.
  The Dates of the Letters from England were of the 15. and 16th. day of April 1584.  My
wife is in great sorrow for my brother Nicholas.
  At night after Sun set, Emerich Sontag brought me word from the  Spanish Ambassadour,
that he had delivered to the Emperour this day my Letters and Book : and that he took them
gracio{u}sly and thankfully, and said that within three, or four dayes he would let the Spanish
Ambassadour understand, when he would give me audience.

            Deus bene-vertat : & ad sui nominis honorem & Laudem.   Amen.

[page 229]

                    Monday, Septembris 3. Mane.       † Pragæ.
                Δ.  Nota.  Sathane  aſtutum e violentum Stratagema.
  Δ. There was a great diſquietneſſe in E. K.  being come home from our Hoſts houſe, where
he had lyen all night upon a form : by reaſon he had been (which he never was the like afore,
as he ſaid ) with wine overcome ſuddenly : yet intending with himſelf to take  heed of being
overſhot in  drinking  of wine : being requeſted  by the Hoſtes to give her a quart of wine
upon the good bargain he had  in a Clock he bought of her for five Suckats : In this company
of drinking was Alexander, the Lord Laſkie his ſervant, who came with us to Prage.  Unto
whom E. K. ( when the drink on the ſudden had overcome him) ſaid he would cut off his
head, and with his walking ſtaffe did touch him fair, and  ſoftly on the neck , ſitting before
him : This Alexander being half drunken himſelf, by & by took thoſe words in great ſnuffe,
and  went to defend himſelf, and ſo took his weapon to him, and therupon they cauſed
Alexander to go down : It was ſupper time ; and I that night refrained to ſuppe, and ſo tarry-
ing at my  Lodging, and looking out, ſaw Alexander ſitting on the great ſtone gainſt our
Lodging : I called to him, and told him that they were at ſupper : And he came over to me,
and he had wept much ; he complained of E.K. his former words, and the touch of the ſtaffe,
how it was againſt his credit to take that in good part , and ſpake many Souldiers terms of
ſtout words, not worthy the recording.  I, therupon went to our Hoſts houſe, and would un-
derſtand the very truth ; and there  I found E.K. faſt on ſleep on a form, moſt ſoundly : for
which I was right ſorry : And yet better pleaſed to perceive the words of E.K.  which ſo
moved Alexander (being half drunken) to have been ſpoken by E.K. when wine , and not
wit, bare rule : and ſo pleaded long  time with Alexander, that of words ſpoken ſo as they were,
no ſuch exact account was to be given to him, &c.  And after two hours perſwaſion cauſed
Alexander to go to bed in our Lodging, where he uſed to lye, For he would have gon out,
to our fromer Inne, in thoſe raging half drunken pangs, he was in : which I thought not good.
This Monday morning E.K. coming home, and  ſeeing Alexander, as he came in ; he ſaid,
they tell I ſhould have ſpoken words, which greatly offended thee yeſternight ,  and  that I
touched thee with my ſtaff, &c.  I know nothing of it, and ſhoke hands friendly with  Alex-
ander.  Well ſaith Alexander, Si fuiſſet alius, &c.  E. K. came up to me :  I told him how
ſorry I was for this miſchance, and told him of the Watchmen perceiving Alexander his diſ-
quiet mind, and hearing his words, they came to me and charged me to have a care of the
peace keeping (as they did indeed) And farther ſaid, that Alexander in his rage, ſaid, that
rather, or before, he ſhould cut off his head, that he would cut E.K. in pieces.  So ſoon as
I had expreſſed that word of this drunken Alexander likewiſe, ( whom I now ſaw quiet, and
E. K. alſo quiet ) ſuddenly E. K. fell into ſuch a rage, that he would be revenged of him  for
ſo ſaying, and for railing on him in the ſtreet, as he did, &c.
  Much a do I, Emericus, and his brother, had to ſtop or hold him from going to Alexander
with his weapon, &c. At length we let him go in his dubblet and hoſe, without a cap or hat
on his head : and into the ſtreet he haſted with his brothers Rapier drawn, and challenged
Alexander to fight : But Alexander went from him, and ſaid.  Nolo Domine Kelleie,  Nolo.
Hereupon E. K. took up a ſtone, and threw after him, as after a dog, and ſo came into the
houſe again, in a moſt furious rage for that he might not fight with Alexander.   The rage and
fury was ſo great in words and geſtures, as might plainly prove, that the wicked enemy ſought
either E. K. his own deſtroying of himſelf, or of me, or his brother, &c.
  This may ſuffice to notifie the mighty temptation and vehement working of the ſubtile ſpi-
ritual enemy Satan, wherewith God ſuffered E. K. to be tempted, and almoſt overcome : to my
great grief, diſcomfort, and moſt great diſcredit : if it ſhould (as the truth was) have come
to the Emperours underſtanding, except he had known me well, &c.  I was in great doubt,
how God would take this offence, and deviſed with my ſelf how I might, with honeſty, be
cleared from the ſhame and danger that might ariſe if theſe two ſhould fight, &c.   At the
leaſt it would croſſe all good hope here with the Emperour, &c. for a time, till God redreſ-
ſed it.
  After I had brought E.K. to ſome quietneſſe, ( by yeilding much to his humour, &c.and
ſaying little : ) not long after, came my meſager from my wife at Cracovia : and Hugh my
ſervant with him, to my great comfort through her letters , and the full ſatiſfying of me by
Hugh my ſervant his knowledge farther than conveniently could be written.

[...]

  About 2 of the clock after Noon, came this letter to me , of the  Emperour his  sending
for me.

[page 230]

    Nobilis, Præclariſſiméque Domine, Domine obſervandſſime.

Cæſar, jam jam ſignificavit Domino Legato Hiſpaniarum , Hero meo, ut Dominationem ve-
ſtram ad ſe evocaret, ad horam ſecundam ; qua eam audire cuperet :  Dominatio veſtra ſi ad
dictam horam venire poterit : accedet ſtatim Dominum Octavium Spinolam, qui eſt Majeſtati
ſue Cæſareæ à Stabulis & Cubiculis.  Is enim eam, ad Majeſtatem ſuam introducet.  Quod
reliquum eſt, me D. veftræ quam officioſiſſimè etiam atque etiam commendo,

                                          Dominationis veſtræ Studioſiſſimus

                                                      Arnoldus Vander Boxe.

[...]

  Hereupon, I went straight up to the Castle: and in the
Ritter-Stove or Guard-Chamber I stayed a little; in the
mean space I sent Emericus to see what was of the clock: and
the Chamberlain, (Octavius Spinola) spied him out of the
Emperours Chamber window, and called him, who came up
to me, and by that time was the Chamberlain come out to me; and by Emericus he under-
stood that I was the man the Emperour waited for. He came to me very * curteously:
told me of the Emperours desire to see me, and to speak with me. So he returned to the
Emperour into the privy Chamber, and came out again for me, and led me by theskirtof theGown throughtheDining-Chamber, andthePrivyChamber,wheretheEmperoursatat
aTable,withagreatChestandStandishofSilver,beforehim,myMonasandLettersbyhim ,
dc.Icametowardhimwithduereverenceofthreecursies,whoshewed meagraciousand
chearful countenance .
ThenIcravedpardonathisMajestieshand,formy boldnessetosend hisMajestyaLetter
andtheMonasHieroglyphica(dedicatedtohisfather.)But Ididitoffincereandentire
goodwillIbaretohisfatherMaximilian,andalsountohisMajesty: andthattherather, because Ihad good proof of the favour which Almighty God beareth unto his Majesty. He thenthankedme forhisfathersBook,anddidaffirm,thathebelievedme,thatIwasaffe&i onateintohisHighnesse: Audofmyefteniationwiththelearnedoftheworld,hehad
heardbytheSpanishEmbassadour;andalsoofmy zealousmindtowardshisgrace. And commendedtheBook Monas,butsaid,thatitwas toohard forhisMajeftiescapcify; and ad ded,thattheSpanishEmballadourtoidhím,thatIhadsomewhat to sayunto him, and fretprosuautilitate. Ianswered,SoIhave,andwithallookingbackwhetheranymanwere intheChamberor10,'Ifonndthatwewerealone: HereuponIbegantodeclarechatAllmy
l i f e t i m e I h a d s p e n t i n l e a r n i n g : b u t f o r t h i s f o r t y y e a r s c o n t i n u a l l y , in s u n d r y m a n n e r s , a n d indiversCountries,withgreatpain,care,andcott,Ihad fron degreetodegree,sought to come by the bestknowledge thaçman might attain unto intheworld :And I found (atlengh )
thatneitheranyman living,noranyBookIcouldyermeetwithal,wasabletoteachme those truthsIdesired,airdlongedfor::AndthereforeIconcludedwithmy felf,tomakeinter cellionandprayertothe giverofwisdom andallgoodthings, tosendmesuchwisdom,asI might know thenatures ofhiscreatures; and also enjoy means to use them to his honour andglory: Andinthispurposemadediversaflâyes:andatlengthitpleasedGod tosend mehis[4]Light,wherebyIam aífuredofhismercifulhearingofmy long,fervent,contant,
nd continualprayer,inthe
Á.Uriel.
causebeforespecified:And that,Hisholy Angols,forcheie
t w o y e a r s a n d a h a l f , h a v e u s e d t o i n f o r m m e : a n d h a v e f i n i s h e d s u c h w o r k s in m y h a n d s , B o o k s f i n i l h e d :
tobeseen,asnomansheartcouldhavewishedforsomuch, yea theyhavebrought me a
Storeofthatvalue,thatnoearthlyKingdomisofchatworthinesseastobecomparedtotheA Stone vertueordignitythereof,dc. And that thesethings be true, I protelted,and took cobroughtby2
witnessetheGod ofHeaven andEarth,bywhoseCommandmentIam now beforeyourMajesty,goodAngela ( SaidI)and haveamessagefrom hinitosayuntoyou ;and thatisthis:

The AngeloftheLord hachappearedtome,andrebukethyouforyoursins. IfyouwillMy meflageto hearme,andbelieveme,youshallTriumph:Ifyouwillnothearme,The Lord,theGodtheEmperour
thatmadeHeaven andEarth,(under whomyoubreath, and have your spirit) pucceth hisR»dolphdoncs

footagainstyour breast, and will throw you headlong down from your seat.
oreover, the Lord hath made this Covenant with me ( by oath ) that he will do and perform. Ifyouwillforsakeyourwickednesse,andturnuntohim,yourSeatshallbethe greatestthateverwas:andtheDevilshallbecomeyourprisoner: WhichDevil;Idid
conjecture,tobetheGreatTurk;(faidI)Thismy Commission,isfromGod : Ifeigne no thing,neitheram IanHypocrite,an Ambitious man,or doting, or dreaming inthisCause, İf Ispeak otherwise then Ihavejust cause,I forsakemy salvation,saidI.
The Emperoursaid,hedidbélieveme,airdsaid,thathethoughtIlovedhimunfaignedly,
and said,thatIshould notneed so earnest protestations: and wouldnot willinglyhave had me to kneel,sooftenasI did.
FartherIsaid,HisMajestywastoseeandunderstandnakedly,from thebeginning,theAllthecourse whole course ofthisAngelicalleading,intructing,and comforting ofme :forsoIwasconi-ofourAxions manded,thatI shoulfdrom thebeginning,nakedlyopen unto Rodolph,themanner ofGod and Visions, hisvisitation,andthew'untohimtheholyVifion: WhichmychargeIamreadytodo.Thenewedcoche
Emperoursaid,atanothertime,hewouldhearandunderstandmore. Ispakeýec1omewhatEmpeiour,
moreinthepurposesbefore,totheintenttheymight get some root,orbeccér stick inhis
minde. Tobeshort,hethankedme,andsaidhewouldhenceforward,takemetobusrecom
mendationandcarryandsomesuchwords(of favourpromised) heused, whichI heardnot well,hefpakesolow. Intheendperceivingthathiswillwastoendforthistime,Ididmy
dutywitlicurfie; and atthedoorgoingout,Iturnedback, and made cursie,andsosame intothenextChamber,wheretheNobleOstaviusSpinola çametomeagain,andwithcurce-ostaviusSpino ouiswords;offeredme greatfriendship. Itook my leaveofhim, and socame through thels.
RittersStoveorGuardChamber,andsodown,andhome. Ihadalargehouraudienceof his Majesty
Deusbenevertat:adfuinominisLaudem,Honorem,deGloriam. Amen.

[page 235]

    Illuſtri & Magnifico Domino, Domino Octavio Spinolæ, ſacræ Cæfareæ Majeſtatis
               à ſtabulis & Cubiculis Domino ſuo obſervandiſſimo.
Illuſtris ac Magnifice Domine: Non poſſum ſatis condignas veſtræ Magnificientiæ agere grati-
as, pro ſingulari illa, qua me Heri amplexi eſtis humanitate & benevolentia: hominem quidem
vobis incognitum, ſed tamen virtutis & veritatis ſtudioſiſſimum: quique omne reliquum meæ
vitæ curriculum (Deo ſic volente) in hoc conſumere decrevi, ut ſacra ſua Cæſarea Majeſtas
clarè percipiat, ſibi, incredibiliter (ferè) propitiam fore Dei Omnipotentis tremendam Majeſtatem.
Atq{u}e quamvis videam multip{l}icib{u}s multarum Regionum negotiis, ſuam ſacram Cæfaream
Majeſtatem occupatiſſimum ſepiſſime teneri, neque aliis, illiſque à me, ſuæ ſacræ Cæſareæ Maje-
ſtati proponendis cauſis, commodè vacare, vel poſſe, vel evidenti aliqua ratione debere:
T A M E N, ſi aliquis excogitari poſſit modus, pro loci, temporis, & rerum occaſione, quo ſua
ſacra C{æ}ſarea Majeſtas, ea penes me videre, vel ex me intelligere dignaretur, quæ illi forent
grata: Ea in re, veſtræ (lluſtriſſimæ Magnificenciæ libentiſſimè audirem vel reciperem Informa-
tionem atque Judicium. Nam in hoc totus ero, ut tempore debito, appareat, Omnipotentis
Dei, & ſuæ ſacræ Cæſareæ Majeſtatis ſervitio (Maximè autem, pro Sacroſanctæ Orthodoxeæ Ca-
tholicæ & Apoſtolicæ fidei Illuſtratione, ac Reipublicæ Chriſtianæ defenſione, amplificatione-
que) Addictiſſimum, devotiſſimum, fideliſſimumque me eſſe, ac fore ſacræ ſu{æ} Cæſareæ Maje-
ſtatis ſervitorem.
                                                  4. Septembris 1584.
Opportunitatis flos  maturè colligi debet:
      Cito enim fiet marcidus.
                                                    Illuſtriſſimæ Magnificentiæ veſtræ.

                                                                    Paratiſſimus

                                                                              Joannes Dee.

[...]

  Emericus went and delivered my Letter to the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour : But this he brought
back again ; ſaying that the Emperour was ridden very early abroad to Brandeiſh, or elſe-
where : (not certainly being known) and that this Noble Octavius Spinola was gone with his
Majeſty.
  Hereupon I determined with changing the Date, to * ſend unto him at
the Emperour his Majeſties returning to Prage.  Deus bene vertat.

[...]

Mr. Doctor Hagek his ſon was       At noon this     I ſent Letters to my wife : to my
by                                    day         Lord Laſkie, and to Mr. Paul Hertoll,
                                                  by the Meſſager   of Reichenſtein,
                                                  on this ſide Niſſe.

[page 234]

                   Wedneſday, September 5.             N O T E.
 Δ. The morning of this Wedneſday (before I prepared myſelf for the former action) I ſent
Emericus with two Letters to be delivered : the one to the Spaniſh Ambaſſadour (giving him
thanks for his honourable dealing with the Emperours Majeſty in my behalf) and the other
to the Noble Octavius Spinola : thanking him likewiſe, and requiring his inſtruction , or adviſe
how I might moſt conveniently proceed in dealing with the Emperours Majeſty : The Copy
of which Letter I thought good to record here, that the effect thereof conſequent, might have
the light of the Original cauſe (Divine and humane) annexed.

[page 236]

                      Tueſday, Septemb. 11.    Hora 9.  ferè.
  Miſi per Dominum Emericum Sontagium Secretarium Domini Palatini Siradienfis  literas
illas ad Dominum Octavium Spinolam: quas ſuperiùs deſcripſi ; ſed ubi in illis ſcripſeram que
me heri amplexi eſtis.  Nunc, ſcripſi, qua me ante paucos dies amplexi eſtis, & pro; quique omne
reliquum, nunc ſcripſi quique reliquum, &c. & pro incredibiliter ( ferè) propitiam, &c. ſcripſi,
nunc, Incredibiliter ( ferè) & modo mirabili, propitiam fore, &c. Et reliqua omnia ſcripſi ut
ſupra annotavi : ſed datæ erant hæ, 11. Die Septembris : Illæ autem priores, 4. Septembris.
  Tradidit iſtas literas (Emericus) Magnifico Domino Spinolæ , jam ſtatim poſt prandium Cæ-
ſareæ Majeſtatis, & craſtina die  (poſt miſſam) pro reſponſo, venire juſſit.

[...]

                                Wednesday,Septembris 12. Manè.
  Δ. This morning, when Emericus Sontag went up to the Caſtle for anſwer from the Empe-
rour : By the Noble Octavius Spinola, he received the effect of this anſwer ,  which I required
the ſame Emericus to write down with his own hand (for ſundry reſpects;) which his own
handwriting I have annexed ad majorem rei fidem. And because his writing is not eaſie  to
be read, I have written it plainer ſomewhat, as followeth :

[...]

            Responsum Imperatoris, per Dominum Spinolam.

Sacra Cæsarea Majeſtas benignè intellexit quæ Dominus Joannes Dee, per ſuæ Majestis Cu-
bicularium, Dominum Octavium Spinolam, proponi curavit : Ad quæ, ſua Majeſtas gratiosè ſic
ſe resolvit : Quòd quandoquidem Latinum Sermonem non omni ex parte exactè calleat : præ-
terea etiam variis & multiplicibus negociis occupata, non ſemper ad audientiam vacare poſſit,
videri ſuæ Majeſtati ut idem Dominus Dee, cum Magnifico Domino Doctore Kurtzio (qui &
ſuæ Majeſtati ab arcanis eſt conſiliis, fatiſque fidus, eruditione quoque inſigni pollet) tracta-
re, & negotia ſua concredere velit. Id quod, ſua Majeſtas prælibato Domino Conſiliario ſuo,
Kurtzio, renunciari curabit. Sin verò, ſecus Domino Johanni Dee videbitur, ſuam Majeſtatem
quomodocunque tandem per occupationes facere poterit, deſiderio Domini Dee ſatisfaétu-
ram.
1584. ⅹⅰⅰ. Septembris.                                     Emericus Sontagits manu
                                                              propria.

                                                                         Pragæ.

[...]

  Δ. Which anſwer, both by word of mouth, and thus by writing being received by me : and
the said Emericus being (by the Noble Spinola) willed at Evenſong time, to bring my anſwer
herein ; which I gave him of my great good liking the ſame, and moſt humble thanks to his Maje-
ſty, for so wise and gratious his conſideration had of the cauſe. I required the ſame Emericus to
underſtand ; when, and how ſoon Doctor Curtzius should be made privy of his Majeſties plea-
ſure herein : and ſo, after my diſpatching of Emericus, I endeavoured my ſelf to render thanks
unto God for his mercies, graces,and truth, in these his affairs : beſeeching him to frame my
heart, tongue, and hand in ſuch ſort, as to his Divine Majesty, my dutifull ſervice, doing, may
be acceptable : as chiefly of me intended to his honour and glory : And ſecondly to the
comfort of the godly and elect : And thirdly to theconfuſion of the proud, arrogant, ſcorn-
full enemies of truth and vertue. Amen.

[...]

                  Thurſday, Septembris 13. Manè, hora 7.        † Pragæ.
  I received the Noble Octavius Spinola his anſwer by Emericus, as concerning my accepting of
the Emperour his gratious former anſwer of condeſcending to my requeſt, ſo much as he conveniently
could : which my anſwer yeſterday * night, late was delivered to the Noble Spinola.   Where-
unto he ſaid, that my Anſwer would be moſt acceptable unto the Emperour : and that to morrow,
(meaning this Thurſday ) the honourable Doctor Curtz ſhould underſtand the Emperours
pleaſure herein. Hereupon I willed Emericus to go up to the Caſtle, and to bring himſelf
in ſight of the Noble Spinola, if he could.   Thereby to help his memory, for warning and in-
formation to be given to the ſaid Doctor Curtz : That ſo we might come together, ſo ſoon,
as conveniently might be.
                        Deo, omnis laus, honor, & gloria.    Amen.

[page 239]

                   Thurſday, Septembris 13. Mane.   † Pragæ.
  Emericus did bring himſelf in ſight of the Chamberlain, the Noble Octavius Spinola : as I
willed him :  And he called Emericus to him, and told him, that this day Doctor Curtz ſhould
underſtand the Emperour his pleaſure, to confer with me, &c.

[...]

  Emericus about 10 of the clock before Noon being in the Ritters Stove (or Guard-Cham-
ber) ſaw Doctor Curtz come out from the Emperour.

[...]

                      Friday, Septemb. 14. Mane, circa 10.
  I ſent Emericus to Doctor Curtz his houſe in parva parte : with my commendations ; and
to ſay that before, I underſtood of Doctor Hageck Mr. Doctor Curtz his deſire to be ac-
quainted with me : whereof I was very glad and desirous : and now I truſt that the Empe-
rour his majeſty, by his Authority hath taken order with him whereby to begin our ac-
quaintance, and ( God willing ) our perpetual friendſhip. The Doctor was at home, and to
Emericus ( ſaying the effect of my meſſage before noted ) the Doctor declared that Captaverat
antea varias occasiones mecum contrahende amicitiæ, &c. and that now he is very joyful of the
occaſion offered by the Emperours Majeſty : and that this day ſundry affairs did hinder the
opportunity of our meeting, but to morrow at any hour ( at my choice ) he would be ready
to welcome me to his houſe : and ſo with the uſual phrase of offering all his ſervices to my
pleaſure, he ſent Emericus to me with his ſaid Anſwer.
                   Quos Deus conjungit, Homo ne ſeparet.   Amen.
            Quos autem Deus & Cæſar copulat, copulatiſſimi maneant.  Amen.

[...]

          Saturday, Septembris, 15. A Meridie hora (ferè) prima. † Pragæ
  I came to the foreſaid (called Doctor) Curtz: about one of the clock after Noon, who
had all the day been ready to have heard me, if I would ſo have had it: but I ſent him word
in the morning by Emericus, that after Noon, (as now at this hour) I would come to him.
Being come, he entertained me curteouſly: and two chairs being at the Tables end, he gave
me the preeminence (by a friendly kind of earneftneſſe) Then he told me, that long ſince
in Germany, he had heard of my fame, and had ſeen of my writings: and that he was very
glad of the opportunity now of my coming to this City; and that otherwayes he was deſirous
of my acquaintance, but chiefly ſeeing the Emperour his Majeſty Ore tenues (for that was his
phraſe) by word of his own mouth, had willed him to hear what I had to ſay to his Majeſty.
I began and declared my long courſe of ſtudy for 40 years, alwayes, by degrees going for-
ward, and deſirous of the beſt, and pure truths in all manner of ſtudies, wherein I had paſſed,
and that I had paſſed as many as were commonly known, and more than are commonly heard
of. But that at length I perceived onely God (and by his good Angels) could ſatiſfie my
deſire: which was to underſtand the natures of all his creatures, and the beſt manner how to uſe
them to his divine honor and glory, and the comfort of the elect, and alſo to the reproof and con-
fuſion of the adverſaries of his name and honor. And herein I had dealed ſundry wayes: And
at length had found the mercies of God ſuch as to ſend me the inſtruction of Michael, Ga-
briel, Raphael, and Uriel, and divers other his good and faithful Meſſagers, ſuch as I had
here now brought books (about 18) to ſhew him the manner of their proceeding: And
that I thought it good to begin at the laſt book, which alſo concerned moſt this preſent Em-
perour Rudolph. And ſo I did; and ſo by degrees from book to book lightly, I gave him a
taſte or ſight of the moſt part, and alſo let him ſee the Stone brought me by Angelical
miniſtery, &c.
  All things being ſeen and heard, that in ſix hours I could ſhew him: at length he required
of me what concluſion, or ſummary report he ſhould make to the Emperour. I anſwered, as
he had occaſion of the things ſeen and heard; but if he would follow my counſel (ſomewhat
expert in theſe Divine and Angelical doings.) That his Majeſty was to thank God for his
great mercies and graces offered: and that by me one, who moſt ſincerely and faithfully gave
his Majeſty to underſtand the will of God herein, and that his Majeſty was to, as Mary
(the bleſſed Virgin) did, to lay up all theſe my informations in his heart, and to ſay Ecce-
servus Domini, fiat voluntas tua, and ſo attend the manner of the Lord his proceeding, while
he framed his life, as it became every Chriſtian to do.
  He ſaid, that he would write (for his own memories help) ſome ſhort note of his obſerva-
tions of my ſpeeches, and things ſeen and marked: and that he would to morrow (being
Sonday) or on Monday, if he conveniently could, make a report to the Emperour, and ſo with
all ſpeed give me to underſtand further of the Emperor his Majeſties will and pleaſure.
Hereupon courteouſly he brought me down to the ſtreet door of his houſe; and I came home
after ſeven of the clock, and an half, in the evening.
      The mercies of God be on me, and his name be magnified and extolled in this world,
         and for ever.  Amen.

[...]

  Note.  In the mean ſpace while I was thus occupied with the foreſaid Mr. Curtz. E.K. was
viſited at our Lodging with a wicked Tempter, who denied any Chriſt to be : and that as the
heart received comfort of all the Members of the body : So that he, who is God, of all things
received comfort by Angels , and other the Members of the world : and that I was now with
one, who would uſe me like a Serpent, with head and tayl compaſſing my confuſion, &c. he
earneſtly reviled E. K. in divers manners: he ſaid, that E.K. ſhould be damned, and ſaid :
moreover, that of our practiſes ſhould never come any fruitfull end, &c.
      Δ. The eternal and Almighty God confound the Adverſaries ofhis truth and glory,
          and of his Son Jeſus Chriſt our Redeemer, and the Triumphant Conquerour a-
          gainſt, Hell, ſin, and the Devil.  Amen.

[page 240]

  On Monday and Tueſday the 17th. and 18th. of September, I ſent Emericus up to the Ca-
ſtle, to liſten after anſwer of that Doctor Curtz his report to the Emperour, of that he had
the perceived by me. (But on Monday Octavius Spinola had ſent into the Town for Emericus,
and told him that the Emperour had care and deſire to underſtand my doing with the Doctor:
And therefore aſked Emericus if I had been with the Doctor, and he affirmed that I had.
Hereof (ſaid he) the Emperour will be glad: And yet (as I began to note) Emericus coming
on Tueſday in the face of the Doctor in the Ritters ſtove; had not one word ſpoken to
him, that either he had ſpoken to the Emperour, or he had not. And therefore I ſuſpect that
the Doctor dealeth not honeſtly, faithfully, or wiſely in this ſo weighty a caſe. And foraſ-
much as he told me, that the Emperour his Majeſty was perſwaded, that he waſpious, &c. per-
haps he would be loath; now, to prefer me to the ſpeech of the Emperour, ſeeing both he him-
ſelf, and the reſt of his counſel ſtood perſwaded to the contrary of this King. Hereupon this
great delay, upon ſiniſter report made to the Emperour might follow, &c.

[page 245]

  Note : As I had finiſhed this Action, and was come to my Study door ; Emericus was re-
turned again from the Spaniſh Embaſſadour, to whom I had ſent him deſirous to know his
leaſure for me : who had now ſent me word by Emericus to come to diner, & ſo he would have
leaſure, &c.  Whereof I was right glad ; and went thither to diner :, who into his inermoſt
Study ( where he himſelf was writing of letters ) cauſed me to be brought. And after I had
complained of injury and violence done unto me, by foul ſlanders, and that, at his Honours
Table : ( to which his Honour, in my behalf had replied : and therefore moſt humbly, and
ſincerely I did thank him ) I ſaid that the Emperous Majeſty himſelf could bear me witneſſe,
that I uſed this phraſe unto him, that I came not for his riches as, Non veni ad vos O Sereniſſime
Cæſar propter divitias veſtras, ut inde ego dives fierem, ſed à Deo miſſu{s}, non audeo aliter facere
quam ejus ad veſtram Cæſaream Majeſtatem voluntatem declarare, &c.  And therefore , How
falſy they ſlandered me, it was evident : and becauſe I perceive that Doctor Curtz hath not
dealt neither with due entertainment of me as of a ſtranger, or a Sudent, or a Mathematitian,
or of one whom ( to my face ) he gave great praiſe unto, as of one long ſince of great fame in
Germany, and ſo in his good eſtimation, &c. And leaſt of all, as of one, who offered ſo great
curteſies to the Emperours Majeſty as he was made witneſſe of : I thought good to ſend unto
the Emperours Majeſty this letter following, and ſo read it unto him after diner,  when I
ſhewed him Librum Pragenſem ſive Cæſareum ; and moreover Librum decimum, ( whoſe former
title was Libri Sexti Mytici Tertiarius ) and there ſhewed him divers Actions in Latine al-
ready tranſlated, becauſe now to tranſlate ſo to him of the Engliſh, did ſeem to me both te-
dious, and to him not ſo readily pleaſant.  All things on his part conſidered, his ſummary
final concluſion was, as well of the laſt offer in this my letter, as of the great actions and di-
vine purpoſes.  For the firſt he declared that he was lineally deſcented out of the conſan-
guinity, of one a Gentleman, but unlettred at the firſt, who left his wife, children, and family in
Maiorca, and aſcended an Hill there, and in place ſolitary remained an whole year, and at the
years end, he came down, but ſo learned and wiſe, that all who knew him before, wondred at it.
And that the ſame man was called Raymondo Lullio : and that he made that which is called
the Philoſophers Stone, as in England ( ſaid he ) I underſtand is good record of it : Therefore
I ſee, quoth he, that it is a truth and poſſible : and as he hath granted the knowledtge of it to
one man, ſo may he grant it to another, &c.  And as for the other higher matters, I perceive
that GOd intendeth ſome great matter in this world.  But I am not able tol judge or determine
of it: But I am of this mind, wherein I can any way further the ſervice of God, I will be
rady and obedient, &c.  And as for the Emperours perſon himſelf, I find him of a good na-
ture, curteous, and moſt zealouſly Catholick : yea ready to ſhed his blood in the cauſe, if
opportunity required.  He underſtandeth the Latine well, and ſpeaketh ſufficently well :
That is true ( quoth I ) for he ſpake well in Latine to me divers things.  Moreover (ſaid
he ) as concerning you, I ſaw him very well affectionated, making great account of your book, &c.
Therefore you are not to regard theſe Dutch mens ill tongues, who hardly can brook any
ſtranger, &c.
  Upon farther matter that I had to ſhew him, I offered my ready repair unto him at all
times of his good leaſure being called or warned.  And he deſirous to ſee the Stone brought
to me by an Angel, willed me to come to morrow alſo, to Diner : I promiſed him, and ſo
with thanks yielded to his honour, I departed toward my Lodging at Bethelem in old
Prage.

[page 246]

              The Copy of the foresaid Letter to the Emperour.

Multis ( O Serenissime Cæsar ) & perniagnis ( ferè omnium ) Creaturarum Dei , immò
i psius Dei, & cœlestibus hand paucis my steriis, arcanisque, vestræ Cæsareæ Majestatis
jussu per me ( jam, ante quatuordecim dies ) fideliter, sincere, & diligenter ( quantum
sex horarum fieri poterat spacio ) declaratis, ac manifestatis: eidem, cui, eadem penes me
videnda, audienda, intelligendaque esse voluistis : Inde, nunc, quæ sit vestræ Cæsareæ Ma-
jestati, simplex (tanquam ab æquo rerum Æstimatore) facta relatio : vel, quod cum relatione
adjunctum Judicium : vel, qualis totius processus excogitata censura : vel, qualis mecum pro-
cedendi, vobis persuasa cautio;  vel, quale pro Cæsarei vestri responsi forma, initum captum-
que consilium, Non sum tam immodeste curiosus, ut expiscar,  Neque aliter, vel alia ratione
de sacræ vestræ Majestatis Cæsareæ prudenti & gratiosa (in præmissis ) Resolutione, sum sol-
licitus, quam, me ( fidelem, sincerum, & devotum ) Dei omnipotentis, & ( in Deo, propter-
que Deum ) vestræ sacræ Cæsareæ Majestatis servitorem deceat.  Video tamen me ( dum
nullum adhuc ad præmissa receperim responsum) per tam alti silentii (quasi ) stimulum, ali-
quantulum impelli, ut secundò vestram Cæsaream Majestatem admoneam, Ne divinam hanc, &
divinitus oblatam Misericordiam, tam inexpectatam, tam magnam, tam inauditam, tam ad-
mirandam, tam multiplicem, tam statui Imperatorio, Christianæque Reipublicæ necessariam,
tam certam, tam paracam, eamque ( per Dei Omnipotentis, Cæsareæque Majestatis vestræ, fi-
delem servitorem ) re ipsa, vobis confirmandam, & administrandam : ( si sacra vestra Cæsa-
rea Majestas voluisset ) parvi momenti negotium, vel inventum aliquod humanum, aut frau-
dem Diabolicam, esse, fuisse, vel fore, ullo modo suspicemini, vel Credatis.  Tali enim & tam
gravi vestræ Cæsareæ Majestatis errore, Omnipotentis Dei incendi posse furorem vehementer
vereor : & ne hanc Dei misericordiam respuentes, ejusdem indignantem provocetis vindictam,
valde metuo.  Quapropter, cum videam Cœlum ipsum , & cælestia talia mysteria , non tali
tantæque curæ, vestræ sacræ Majestati Cæsareæ adhuc esse, quali, quantæque optassem equi-
dem : Ego potius quam, ut, vel Deus hujus suæ ( prius inauditæ ) Misericordiæ ultroque
vestræ Cæsareæ Majestati oblatæ, prorsus nullum ( penes homines ) haberet conspicuum ju-
dicium, argumentum, Testimonium vel experimentum : Et potius quam mea (sæpe nominata)
fidelitas, sincericas, & Devotio ( sive votum ) erga Deum & vestram Cæsaream Majestatem,
omni ( apud posteros nostros ) careret fide, & veritatis manifestæ robore : In Dei Nomine,
& ad ejus laudem, honorem, & gloriam : & ut vestræ serenissimæ Cæsareæ Majestatis satisfa-
ciam desiderio Heroico, De lapide illo Benedicto : ( Philosophorum vocato lapide ) in infal-
libiliter videndo, possidendo & utendo : Assero vestræ sacræ Cæsareæ Majestati, lapidem eun-
dem me ( auxilio favoreque Divino ) conficere posse.  Et propterea ; Si vestra Cæsarea Ma-
jestas, me velit interim, sibi intime charum habere : Et, si, pro dignitate tanti mysterii, &
Beneficii ( sibi à me liberalissime & humillime exhibendi ) gratiosè me tractare dignabitur
( Non tamen alio quidem vel altiori me insigniens Titulo quam qui vestræ Cæsareæ Majesta-
tis Philosopho & Mathematico conveniat, ) Hiis literis ore & corde polliceor,  sanctéque coram
Deo Omnipotenti voveo : Opus illud philosophicum, Omnibus suis numeris perfecttum, in
manus vestras Cæsareas, ( & sine sumptibus vestris ad illud opus perficiendum requirendis )
ac brevissimo, quo fieri poterit, tempore ( Nutu Dei ) me daturum. De aliis præterea Arcanis,
ad huc mihi silendum esse video. Nunc autem sacræ Cæsareæ Majestatis vestræ gratiosam, li-
beram, constantemque voluntatem, in præmissis, non aliter, misi ex vestro proprio gracioso ore
vel ex vestris Cæsareis literis propriis, intelligere Cupio.  Nullum enim jam nosco, dignum
& aptum, qui in istis, aliísque Naturæ & Artis secretis, meus ( penes vestram Cæsaream Ma-
jestatem ) fieri deberet Mercurius.

[...]

                            Tueſday,  Septembris 25.   Pragæ.
  Note : I went to Diner to the Spaniſh Embaſſadour : and carryed with me the Stone
brought me by an Angel ; and the fourth Book, wherein the manner of the bringing of it is
expreffed.  And alſo I carried with me Librum Sextum Sanctum Myſticum.
  After Diner, when I had ſhewed him theſe things : his final anſwer was , that verily he
took the doing to be by good Angel : marry, the matters to be too great : Therefore (ſaid I)
they are for the ſervice of God, and not onely man.  He ſaid he was a ſinner, and not wor-
thy to be privy, much leſſe to be a doer in them :  Notwithſtanding whatſoever he can do
therein acceptable to God, he would be moſt obedient thereto.  He deſired a Copy of the
Emperour his foreſaid letters, that he might conſider circumſpectly of the Contents before he
ſhould deliver them ; whereunto I conſented.  Rendering his honour thanks I de-
parted.
  After my return home, I found E. K. reſolved to go from hence to morrow, for his wife,
and ſo ſtraightway into  England : which was to me a grief :  But what can I do, but
refer all to the mercies of God, whom I have called upon for wiſdom to ſerve him withal ? I
have put my truſt in the Lord, I have not murmured at any ſuch pangs and tentations
hitherto.
  The mercies of the Higheſt be upon me, as I have put my truſt in him.
                                          Amen.
  Now were we ( all ) brought to great penury : not able without the Lord Laſkies, or ſome
heavenly help, to ſuſtain our ſtate any longer.
  Beſides this, I underſtood of the Queens diſpleaſure for my departure , and of the Biſhop
of London his intent to have begun to have accuſed me of Conjuration , and ſo to have had
the ſecret aſſiſtance of you know whom.
  Tu  es Deus fortitudo mea, refugium meum Suſceptor meus, & liberator meus.
                                          Amen.

[page 247]

              Wedenſday, Septembris 26.  Ante Meridiem.   Pragæ.
  About 10 and a half of the clock, Dr. Curtz ſent with Mr. Simon Hageck his ſervant to
know my lodging : He had paſſed not far off in a lane on horſeback his ſelf going into the
Town, and ſo met Mr. Simon Hageck at the lanes end, &c.

[...]

                        Thurſday, Septembris 27.  † Pragæ.
Mane : About 7. of the clock came Dr. Curtz his ſervant from his Maſter to tell
that his Maſter would come unto me at 9 of the clock.

[...]

  At 9 of the clock came Dr. Curtz on horſeback to me, to my lodging (at Doctor Hageck
his houſe by Bethleem) my wife he ſaluted, and little Katharine, my daughter.  Mr. Kelly
had gotten him into his chamber, not willing to be ſeen.
After he was come up into my little Study, and there ſet, in Mr. Kelly his uſual place, and
I in mine; I began to complain of the great injury done unto me here; for I came as a ſin-
cere and faithful ſervitour of the Emperour his Majeſty, intending all goodneſſe and honour
unto him: no hindrance, loſſe or hurt; neither came I propter divitias Cæſaris mihi colligen-
das, as I ſaid expreſſely unto his Majeſty. I was, before I came hither, of good name and
fame, both in this Court, and all Europe over, As you your ſelf Mr. Doctor (quoth I) can bear
me witneſſe: and other in this Court divers: And that here my name and fame ſhould ſuf-
fer ſhipwrack, where I thought I had been in, a ſure Haven of my principal Patrone: My
thinketh that great injury is done unto me: I know no means how to help it, but to give
you warning of the envious malitious backbiters that alſo are about this Court, that as you
find occaſion, you might encounter with this evil, and foul monſter, in ſo mighty a Princes
Cauſe intruding it ſelf.
  The Doctor ſeemed not to know what I meant. I told him, that at a Noble-mans Table,
There was, of great account, who ſaid, that there was an Engliſhman, come to the Emperours,
A bankrupt Alchimiſt, a Conjurer, and Necromantiſt: who had  ſold his own goods, and given the
Lord Laſkie the money: and that he had beguiled him: and that now he would fain get ſome of
the Emperour his money from him, &c.  The Doctor ſeemed greatly to miſlike theſe ſlanderous
words, and ſaid, that he never heard of any ſuch; with ſome few words more, of thewicked
manner of backbiters.
  After this, as concerning the report making to the Emperour, of that I had ſhewed unto
him, at his houſe, (as before is noted) he ſaid that he had made a plain and ſincere report.
Whereunto the Emperours Majeſty, had (as yet) given no anſwer.  And to be plain with
you (ſaid he) his Majeſty thinketh them almoſt either incredible, or impoſſible: and would
have ſome leaſure to conſider of them: and is deſirous to have the ſight of thoſe Latine A-
ctions you ſhewed me, or a copy of them, and eſpecially, of that, which containeth a para-
phraſis of the Apoſtolical Creed.  I anſwered, that my Books I would not deliver out of my
hands: And as for a Copy of them, I would (at leaſure) write it, that his Majeſty might
have it. And then I told him farther, that becauſe it was ſo long before I heard any word of
him, I had letters ready to ſend to the Emperours Majeſty, to have farther declared my mind
unto him, and I declared unto him the tenor of them: and he told me that about three of the
clock after noon, his man ſhould go to the Court, and if then I would ſend them, his man
ſhould carry them. I anſwered that I would expect a day or two for the Emperours return
hither. After this we talked of ſome Mathematical matters: And I ſhewed him the little
Book de ſuperficierum diviſionibus, ſet forth by me and Commandinus, printed at Pezaro in
Italy. He ſaid that he never ſaw it before: I bad him then take it with him to peruſe: and
that if I had another Copy, I would give it him; but I had none other but that. I ſhewed
him alſo the Propædeamata Aphoriſtica de præſtantioribus quibuſdam Natare virtutibus, which he
had never ſeen before. After this, with mutual curteſies offered on both parts (after the
manner of the world) he took his horſe, and returned homeward.

[page 248]

                        Friday, Septembris, 28.  Pragæ.
Intending to ſend the Emperours letter ( here before written ) to his Majeſty, by my good
friend, the Spaniſh Embaſſadour, I wrote this letter to ſend to the Embaſſadour in that be-
half, and as concerning the credit of theſe Actions.

[...]

      Illuſtriſimo Domino, Domino Don Gulielmo de Sancto Clemente, ſereniſſimi
            atque Catholici Hiſpaniarum Regis apud ſacram Cæſaream Ma-
                jeſtatem, &c. Legato, Domino ſuo obſervandiſimo.

Illustris & Magnifice Heros : Multis hoc probari poteſt teſtimoniis & exemplis , quod illa,
quæ (preter  vulgarium artium & ſcientiarum decreta) Nova, & ſupra vulgariter Studioſo-
rum expectationem, hominibus (licet piis & candidis quidem) Divinitus revelantur myſteria,
cum ſumma difficultate vel intelliguntur à pauciſſimis, vel vix ſine ſuſpicione admittuntur, aut
creduntur à pluri{b}us : Aſt qualis , in noſtris, (ſi rectæ piéque informatæ roſtris adhibeatur
judicium) eſſe poteſt ſuſpitio ? Nam à Deo Omnipotente, per multos jam annos, fideliter, ar-
denter, & conſtanter per preces requiſita ſapientia : Una (ſcilicet quæ penes nos quidem) vi-
detur eſſe radix & occaſio tanti iſtius Doni obtinendi.  Aſt in cœleſti ſuo Palatio, ante condi-
tum mundum, determinata, & aſſignata erga nos Miſericordia & gratia Omnipotentis Dei,
præcipuum, ſolidum, immobileque hujus tanti myſterii eſt cenſendum fundamentum : In quo
myſterio, talis relucet, per potentes fideleſque Angelos Iſagogica Informatio, De Arcanis Dei
conſiliis, tam in mundi creatione Creaturarumque naturis, & vero uſu, quam in mundi præ-
ſentis moxque futuri ſtatu : Et preterea, de unius Catholicæ Eccleſiæ (chariſſimæ Jeſu Chri-
ſti ſpousæ, noſtræque piæ matris) ſanctitate, dignitate, & Authoritate ( veluti in qua etiam
eſt Sanctorum Communio, & Peccatorum remiſſio ) & de multis nondum per nos revelandis
Dei Arcanis Magnalibus & Determinationibus : Quòd tantum abeſt, ut aliquis (ſanæ mentis)
Chriſtianus, Actiones Noſtras Myſticas, Diabolicas eſſe fraudes, contendere, immo ne ſuſpica-
ri quidem conetur aut poſſit : ut potius , tale Arcanum Dei propoſitum , incredibiliter admi-
rari, rationem humanam, in eiſdem examinandis , ſubjugare, & Dei erga Electos ſuos admi-
randam miſericordiam in iſtis eſſe manifeſtam, humillimè, & cum ſummo tremore fateri velit :
Ego quidem , hactenus, in istis , aliud ( ferè ) nihil , me eſſe invenio , niſi Calamum ſcribæ,
velociter per me ſcribentis.  Nam viſa auditaque (in mea præſentia) fideliſſimè, de litera in-
terdum ad literam, interdum, verbatim, interdum pluribus ſimul receptis verbis (ipſo eodem
temporis momento, quo traduntur) annotare ſum ſolitus.  Aſt jam in quam multa excrevit
Noſter talis labor volumina ? Ex quibus omnibns illum fructum , ſucceſſumque expectamus,
qualem præfixit ille, cujus nutui cuncta obediunt. Iſtas autem ad ſuam ſacrem Cæſaream Maje-
ſtatem literas meas : Cum veſtra magnificentia opportunitatem inveniet primam , ſi meo nomi-
ne: humillimè eidem exhibere dignabitur ,  Tum magno mihi (Divinitus) injuncto , levatus
ero onere : Tum magno, à veſtra magnificentia affectus beneficio : Interim verò , Dum ſuæ ſa-
cræ Majeſtatis Cæſareæ ad iſtas reſponſum dabitur, (nimirum ſi ad 14. vel 16. dies prius ex-
pectandum eſſet) vel, ſtatim poſt acceptum reſponſum (ſi tam expeditè illud recipere poſſum,
quàm quod recepi ultimo) ad iter me accingere debeo, propter familiam , libros , & aliquam
meam ſuppellectilem, huc (ante hyemis aſperitatem) tranſferendam.  Ubi, cum Cæſareæ Ma-
jeſtatis gratioſo favore, & ſub ipſius Protectione Imperatoria , voluntatem Omnipotentis Dei
implere, pro viribus, & ſuæ ſacræ Cæſareæ Majeſtati inſervire (tanquam ejuſdem Philoſophus &
Mathematicus) fideliſſime, de tempore in tempus, paratus eſſe potero.

                                                Illuſtri veſtre Magnificentiæ

                                                    Addictiſſimus

                                                                    Joannes Dee.

            I annexed hereunto a Poſt-ſcript, which followeth :

                                Poſt-ſcriptum.

Mearum eſſe partium , & conſultum eſſe duxi veſtræ Magnificentiæ pauciſſimis verbis
ſignificare , quod heri , manè,  hora nona , vir egregius , & ſuæ Majeſtis Cæſareæ fi-
dus Conſiliarius D. Doctor Curtzius, me humaniſſimè inviſebat in meo ergaſtulo , & hy-
pocauſtato , juxta Bethlehem , ubi videre poterat Bibliothecam preſentem meam , nullam
(ferè) aliam eſſe ,  præter Sancta Dei Evangelia & Biblia ſacra ipſoſque noſtrorum myſte-
riorum libros : Ego autem quodam humili modo (inter cæteras querelas meas) de tam lon-
ga interpoſita mora conquerebar , inter ejuſdem (de meis rebus) factam relationem , &
Cæſareum de eiſdem recipiendum reſponſum. Ille verò ſe ſimpliciſſimè Cæſareæ Majeſti viſa
auditaque (penes me ) retuliſſe aſſeruit , nullo ſuo , de eiſdem , adhibito judicio.  Ve-
rum, Cæſari (dixit) quaſi impoſſibilia vel incredibilia fuiſſe viſa.  Et de reſponſo mihi  (in
hac parte) dando , ſecum , adhuc , ſuam deliberare velle Majeſtatem Cæfaream.  Unde ego
de literis meis iſtis , ſuæ Majeſti mittendis , mentionem feci & ſummatim earundem teno-
rem , eidem enarravi.  Ille eaſdem ſtatim habere voluit , ipſi Cæſareæ Majeſtati à Meridie
mittendas: Ego quidem Cæſaris me velle ad paucul{o}s dies expectare adventum dixi.  Deinde
de rebus Mathematicis breviſſime inter nos habito ſermone , illique (ad pervidendum ) dato
libello quodam Geometrico ( per me & Federicum Commandinuis Urbinatem ) in lucem olim
dato, & mutuis, poſt, utrinque promiſſis officiis humanitatis & benevolentiæ, abiit.

                                                                1584. Sept.28.
