---
edition_key: "clarendon"
license: "CC0 1.0"
source_key: "Annals of the Reformation and Establishment of Religion"
volume_key: "II-II"
---

[page 206]

[…]

Certain wickedly disposed persons this year practised
magic against her majesty queen Elizabeth, to take away
her life.   This I take from Meric Casaubon, D. D. (the son
of the great Isaac of that name,) in his book of Credulity
and Incredulity : which he had from the credit of Bodin, in
the preface to his Dæmonology.   Who relateth there, that
three waxen images were framed ; whereof one was of the
queen, and the two other of two persons nearest her, (per-
haps the lord treasurer Burghley, and the lord high stew-
ard, the earl of Leicester,) which were found in the house of
a priest near Islington, (who was a magician, and so reputed,)
in order to take away their lives.   Which he repeateth again
in his second book : and more particularly, that it was in the
year 1578.   And that the English ambassador and many
Frenchmen did divulge it and report it.   And that the busi-
ness was then under trial, and not yet perfectly known.
   Divers such dealers in magic and conjuration seem to
have been about these times.   Such another was this year
discovered in Southwark, as Stow hath recorded.   Who,
being vehemently suspected for a conjurer, was convented
before the ordinary judge there, in St. Saviour’s church :
and being accordingly present, leaning his head on a pew,
suddenly fell down dead, with some little rattling in his
throat.   There were found about him, under his clothes,
five books of conjuration, and, among other things, the re-
semblance of a man in tin, having three dice in his hand,
and this writing, Chance dice fortunately ; besides divers
papers of such like matters.   When the judge declared this

[page 207]

as a most remarkable judgment of God, before them all that
were present, upon this practiser of that wicked art.

[…]

[page 404]

[…]

Dr. Dee, the famous astronomer, set forth a book for the
Cathay Cathay voyage, which was intended this year for discovery
of the north-east parts of the world.   It was entitled, In-
structions for the two masters, Charles Jackman and Ar-
thur Pett, in two barkcs, the George and William : given
and delivered to them at the court-day, holden at the Mus-

[page 405]

covy-house, the 17th day of May, 1580.   With which instruc-
tions a new chart, made by hand, was given also to each
of the said two masters, expressing their Cathay voyage
more exactly than any other yet published.   It began, “ In
“ the name of Jesus.   If we reckon from Wardhouse to Col-
“ goyeve island, 400 miles,” &c.   It was found among the
MSS. of the lord treasurer Burghley ; and was afterwards
printed by Mr. Hackluit, in his book of voyages.   I only
mention an addition in the conclusion of the MS. left out
in print. The last period is this : “ You have opportunity
“ also to sail over to Japan island ; where you shall find
“ Christen men, Jesuits, of many countries of Christen-
“ dom, and perhaps some Englishmen. At whose hands
“ you may have great instructions and advice for our
“ affairs in hand.”   Thus far the print. Then follows in
that MS. “ God be favourable to these attempts, greatly
“ tending to his glory, and the great honour of this king-
“ dom.   Amen.”

[…]

[page 558]

Number ⅩⅬⅤ.

Mr. John Dee to the lord treasurer : offering to discover to
   the queen where treasures of gold, silver, &c. were hid in
   the bowels of the earth.

   RIGHT honorable and my singular good lord : where-
as of late your honour very favourably used me, considering
your marvaillous scantness of leisure from very weighty
matters and public ; I am now therefore most humbly to
render thanks to your honour.   Since which time I have
some days attended at London, hoping for your lordship
coming thither.   And on Friday last perceiving your ho-
nour to be almost in a readiness to ride towards the court,
ere I could get to London too, &c.   Therefore finding your
lordship at all times of usual access for suitors, so fraught
with matters of more importance, than any of mine can just-
ly be deemed, I thought good, with your lordship’s leave
and favour, thus by writing to enjoy one hour of your lord-

[page 559]

ships leisure, (best known to your lordship when that is,) to
view the pattern of some part of my simple suit, which here-
tofore I would gladly have opened unto your honour by
word of mouth.   And that is this.
   So much of my intent and studious doings is well known
unto your lordship, and the most part of all universities in
Christendom, (and further,) that for these twenty years last
past, and longer, it may be very truly avouched, that I have
had a mervaillous zele, taken very great care, endured great
travail and toyl, both of mind and body, and spent very
many hundred pounds ; only for the attaining some good
and certain knowledge in the best and rarest matters, ma-
thematical and philosophical.   How little or much therein
the eternal God hath imparted to me, (for my talent,) he
onely best knoweth : but certainly by due conference with
all that ever I yet met with in Europe, the poor English
Britan, (il favorita de vostra excellentia,) hath carried the
bell away.   God Almighty have the glory.   The same zele
remaineth, (yea rather greater is grown,) but the ability for
charges is far lesser : and that somewhat occasioned the
sooner through my frank dealing, for procuring and pur-
chasing speedy means of good knowledge.   Which also I
did upon no small hope, that some needful supportal would
be for me in due time devised, either through the mere and
gracious good favour, that I was persuaded the queen’s most
excellent majesty did bear unto me : or else through the
procurement of some of the right honourable counsillors :
which both right well know by hard dealing my father,
Rowland Dee, (servant to her majesties father, and most
renewed and triumphant king of our age,) was disabled
for leaving unto me due maintenance ; and also sufficiently
understood of sundry suits in my behalf mentioned, for
some aid towards the atchieving of some of my honest in-
tents.   Of which suits no one hitherto hath taken the wished
for success, for any my behoof : nay, in the mean time of
some of my travails beyond the seas, unless your honour
had put to your helping liand, I had been defeated of that
little exhibition which I enjoy : being but borrowed a while

[page 560]

by special privilege and favour extraordinary.   And that
unwillingly on my part, if I could otherwise have had the
supply thereof in like yearly value : which, as God knoweth,
findeth not me and my poor family necessary meat, drink,
and fewel, for a frugal, philosophical diet, &c.
   To compare with any in public deserts and learning, I
neither dare, nor justly can ; but in zele to the best learn-
ing and knowledge, and incredible toyls of body and mind
very many years, therefore only endured, I know most as-
suredly, that the learned never bred any man, whose ac-
counts therein can evidently be proved greater than mine.
   Then he proceeded to mention his discourse with the lord
treasurer, at his last being with him, of tresure hid. Con-
cerning which he thus expatiated.
   Ⅰ. It may please your honour to consider this clause,
truly by me noted out of Theseus Ambrosius, fol. 206. b.
In copiosa ilia Antonii de Fantis Tarvissini libroriim mul-
titudine,magnum sane volumen repertum fuit ; in quo ab-
dita quamplurima : concerning philosophy, medicine, know-
ledge of herbs also, pertaining unto astrology, geomantia
and magia.   Et, in ejus præcipua quadam parte, tracta-
batur de Thesauris per totum fere orbem reconditis, atque
latentibus : quorum admodum clara atque specifica notio
haberi poterat.   Secondly, Out of Henric. Leicestrensis, I
suppose, it is noted in the Summary of English Chronicle,
anno 1344, of a Sarazin coming then to earl Warren, as
concerning a great treasure hid in the ground, in the marches
of Wales, and of the good success thereof.   Thirdly, This
twenty years space, I have had sundry such matters detect-
ed unto me in sundry lands.   Fourthly, Of late I have been
sued unto by divers sorts of the people.   Of which some by
vehement iterated dreams, some by vision, (as they have
thought,) others by speech formed to their imagination by
night, have been informed of certain places where tresure
doth ly hid. Which all for fear of keepers, (as the phrase
commonly nameth them,) or for mistrust of truth in the
places assigned, and some for some other causes, have for-
born to deal further ; unless I should encourage them, and

[page 561]

counsil them how to procede.   Wherein I have always been
contented to hear the histories, fantasies, or illusions to me
reported ; but never intermeddled according to the desire
of such.   Hereof might grow many articles of question and
controversy among the common learned, and scruples among
theologians.   Which all I cut off from this place : ready to
answer only your lordship most largely, in termes of godly
philosophy, when opportunity shall serve ; making small
account of vulgar opinions in matter of so rare knowledge.
But making always my chief reckoning to do nothing but
that which may stand with the profession of a true Chris-
tian, and of a faithful subject.
   But if besides all books, dreams, visions, reports, and vir-
gula divina, by any other natural means, and likely demon-
strations of sympathia et antipathia rerum, or by attrac-
tion or repulsion, the places may be discryed or discovered,
where gold, silver, or better matter doth ly hid within cer-
tain distance ; how great a commodity should it be, for the
queen’s majesty and the commonwealth of this kingdom, if
by such a secret, not only tresure hid may be deciphered in
precise place, but also it may be disclosed, where in this
land any mines, veins, or owre of gold and silver, be natu-
rally planted ?
   Then he mentioneth the name of a strange book, which
in old time was in this land, viz. Pandulphus de Meatibus
Terræ.
   One part of his present suit to his honour was, that by
his lordship’s wisdom the queen’s majesty might be induced
to think somewhat favourably (as very many other noble
and learned of foreign lands do) of my great travails, pa-
tience, constancy, cost, and credit, in matters philosophical
and mathematical.   And thereupon in the end of my care-
ful race, to let some token of her majesties royal good affec-
tion procede towards me : whom your lordship knoweth, or
may know, that emperors, kings, princes, dukes, marchises,
earls, barons, and others, many men of great power and
magnificent courage, have sued unto in my time, to enjoy
my simple talent in their service or company. To whom

[page 562]

all I ever have given answer, (as my duty was, and my
stomac served me thereto,) for the honour of my natural
and dread sovereign, for the time, here reigning, &c.   The
value of a mine is matter for a king’s tresure, but a pot of
two or three hundred pounds hid in the ground, jarr, or
tree, is but the price of a good book, or instrument for per-
spective, astronomy, or some feat of importance, &c.
   He proffered to do his endeavour the best he can, at his
own cost and charges, to discover and deliver due proof of
a mine, or owre of gold or silver, in some one place of her
graces kingdoms and dominions, to her graces only use :
upon this consideration, that her majesty give him, by her
letters patents, her right and propriety in all tresure trové,
by digging and searching any where in her kingdomes, and
his assignes.   And this to dure the term of his life.   And
in token of my heart fully bent to shew my self thankful to
your lordship for compassing either of these two ways, I
mean, either by provision for 200l. yearly, or this casual
mart of painful search (before God I promise unto your
lordship, or will by oath upon the evangelists be bound) of
all tresure trové, coming to my hand, to impart unto your
lordship, or assure one half, &c.
   Thirdly, The last and principal point of this my present
suite to your lordship is, for your lordships hand to a letter,
directed to Mr. Harley, keeper of the records of Wigmor
castle, or to whom in this case it doth appertain.   For that
at my late being there, I espied an heap of old papers and
parchments, obligations, acquittances, accounts, &c. in time
past, belonging to the abby of Wigmor, (and there ly rot-
ten, spoiled, and tost in an old decayed chapel,) not com-
mitted to any man’s special charge. But three quarters of
them I understand to have been taken away by divers,
either taylers or others, in time past.   Now my phantasy
is, that in some of them will be some mention made of noble
men, or gentlemen in those days : whereby either for chro-
nicle, or pedegree, some good matter may be collected out
of them by me, at my leisure, by way of a recreation.   And
whatsoever I shall find in them, either of your lordships

[page 563]

auncestors, in direct line, branch, paternal, or match, (where-
in I am not utterly ignorant,) either of any other matter
worthy your lordships knowledge, I will make true report,
and deliver the same to your lordships ordering, &c. Dated
the 3d of October, 1574.
                     Your lordships most bounden,
                                            John Dee.

[…]
