---
edition_key: "clarendon"
license: "CC0 1.0"
source_key: "Annals of the Reformation and Establishment of Religion"
volume_key: "II-I"
---

[page 523]

[…]

  This leadeth me to say something that occurreth this
year, of another way to the acquisition of vast treasure, un-
dertaken by John Dee.   This is the first time I meet with
the mention of that great and famous English mathemati-
cian and astronomer ; noted throughout the world for his
deep knowledge in those sciences.   He was the son of Ro-
land Dee, a servant to king Henry ⅤⅠⅠⅠ.   Which Roland
had received some hard dealing ; and was so disabled from
leaving his son due maintenance.   This year I find the said
John Dee offering to the lord treasurer Burghley, by his
art, to discover to the queen where treasure was concealed
in the bowels of the earth. The treasurer, valuing the man
for his learning, had vouchsafed, in the midst of his weighty
business of state, to admit him to conversation with him.
Which in a letter he thankfully took notice of.   Which let-

[page 524]

ter I choose to set down, because it will declare much, both
of the man, his learning, and of his offer : and will preserve
some notable memorial of him.   See it exemplified in the
Appendix.

  The sum whereof was, “ That for the suit he would
“ gladly have opened unto your honour by word of
“ mouth, he desired him to view in this letter view a pattern of
“ some part of it, viz. so much of his intent and studious
“ doings, as was well known unto his honour, and the
“ most part of all the universities in Christendom, (and
“ further,) that for twenty years past, and longer, it might
“ truly be avouched, that he had a marvellous zeal, en-
“ dured great travail and toil, both of mind and body,
“ spent many hundred pounds, only for the attaining some
“ good and certain knowledge in the best and rarest mat-
“ ters, mathematical and philosophical.   And that by due
“ conference with all persons that ever he yet met with
“ in Europe, the poor English Briton [meaning himself]
“ had carried away the bell : for which he gave God the
“ glory. That the same zeal remained, yea rather, was
“ grown greater ; but that his ability, in respect of charges,
“ was far less.   And that somewhat occasioned his suit, (for
“ procuring speedy means of good knowledge,) upon no
“ small hopes that some needful support would be for him
“ devised, through the good favour the queen bore to him,
“ or through the procurement of some of the right honour-
“ able counsellors ; who by some hard dealing, his father,
“ servant to her majesty’s father, was disabled from leaving
“ him due maintenance, &c.   That in zeal to the best learn-
“ ing and knowledge, and incredible toil in body and mind
“ for many years, therefore only endured, he knew most
“ assuredly that the learned never bred any man whose
“ account therein could be greater than his, &c.   That he
“ had, for twenty years space, sundry matters [about trea-
“ sure hid in the ground] detected to him in sundry lands.
“ That he had been sued unto by sundry sorts of people ;
“ who, some of them by vehement dreams reiterated ; some
“ by visions ; others by speech formed to their imaginations

[page 525]

“ in the night, had been informed of certain places where
“ treasure lay hid.   And these would not deal further in
“ search, for some reasons, till he should encourage or
“ counsel them to proceed.   But that he would never in-
“ termeddle, &c.   That he made it always his chief reckon-
“ ing to do nothing but what might stand with the profes-
“ sion of a true Christian and of a faithful subject.
  “ But that if, besides all books, dreams, visions, reports,
“ and the virgula divina, by any other natural means, and
“ likely demonstrations of sympathla et antipathia rerum,
“ or by attraction or repulsion, the places might be descried
“ or discovered, where gold, silver, or better matter did lie
“ hid within certain distance ; how great a commodity should
“ it be for the queen, and the common wealth of this king-
“ dom, if by such a secret it might be deciphered in precise
“ place.   And also where in this land any mines or veins of
“ silver and gold ore are naturally planted.   And he pro-
“ mised to discover such a certain mine in some place of her
“ majesty’s kingdom, for her only use : upon this con-
“ sideration, that she would give him, by her letters pa-
“ tents, her right and propriety in all treasure trouvé, by
“ digging in any of her kingdoms.” The rest I refer to the
letter.
  And being a man studious of antiquities, he had dis-
covered another sort of treasure, viz. of many ancient re-
cords, in an old chapel in or near Wigmore castle, and for-
merly belonging to the abbot ; which had lain there rotting
and tossed about unregarded.   In the perusal of these pa-
pers he was desirous to bestow some of his leisure time, by
way of recreation, expecting to collect thence some histori-
cal matters, either of chronicle or pedigree.   And therefore
requested a letter from the lord treasurer to Mr. Harly,
keeper of the records of that castle, to permit him to resort
thither ; promising the said lord to give him account of
whatsoever he should find there worthy his knowledge, and
particularly any thing relating to his lordship’s family.
  This John Dee, (that I may bring more of his story to-
gether,) in May, anno 1580, wrote instructions for the north-

[page 526]

east passage to China, delivered to the two masters, Charles
Jackman and Arthur Pett, at the court day, May 17,
holden at the Moscovy house in London.   With which in-
structions a new chart, made by his hand, was given also
to each of them, expressing their Cathay voyage more ex-
actly than any yet published.
  He did also soon after write a very learned discourse
about the reformation of the calendar. And asserted therein
eleven days to be added to the calendar rather than ten,
according to the Gregorian reformation of it.   This dis-
course did the lord Burghley in his retirement read over in
the year 1583, and gave the following account thereof in
writing, (being absent from court,) to his son Robert Ce-
cil ; and to be by him, as it seems, imparted to the queen ;
with the effect of his discourse with the author himself.
  “ I have perused Mr. Dee’s book concerning his opinion
“ for the reformation of the old Roman calendar. And I
“ have conferred also by speech with him at good length
“ thereon. And I find his judgment resolute for the error
“ and inconvenience, to have it continual, [that is, to keep
“ to our old way of reckoning the year.] But he differeth
“ in the quantity of the error : for he hath many proofs by
“ demonstration astronomical, that the superfluous number
“ of days to be abridged are eleven, where the Gregorian
“ judgment makes them to be but ten.   I am not skilful in
“ the theoricks, to discern the points and minutes ; but yet
“ I am inclined to think him in the right line : for I find he
“ maketh his root from the very point of the nativity of
“ Christ, in the meridian of Bethlehem.   And the Romans
“ have made their root from the time of the council of
“ Nice.   And according to that, they may make their opinion.
“ But by Mr. Dee it appeareth, the error in computation
“ grew between the radix of Christ’s nativity and the cele-
“ bration of the Nicene council.   Which he proveth by a
“ great number of good authorities ; such as I think the
“ Romanists cannot deny.
  “ It were good, in mine opinion, (whereunto he also con-
“senteth,) that by her majesty’s order some skilful men in

[page 527]

“ this science, as Mr. Diggs, and others, to be called out of
“ the universities, might peruse his work, and confer the
“ thing by speech.   And though he discovereth the ten days
“ to be insufficient, yet he yieldeth, for conformity, with
“ the rest of the world, to assent to the reformation of our
“ English calendar, with the abridgment of ten days only ;
“ so as the truth be denounced to the world, that it ought
“ to be eleven days.   Hoping that the truth will draw the
“ Romanists, and the other parts of Christendom, to take
“ out of their calendar hereafter the same odd day. There
“ appeareth great cause to have this conference accelerated.
“ For that it is requisite for a secret matter to be reformed
“ before November.   So as either every month, from March
“ to November, may bear equal defalcation, or else some
“ one month bear the whole. Thus much I thought good
“ briefly to deliver you mine opinion.”
  A few contents of this famous book may be collected from
certain notes, Mr. Cecil, the lord treasurer’s son, took out
of it.   Setting down (as I take it from his MS.) four strange
points therein laid down.   Ⅰ. The great declination of the
sun is yearly changeable.   Which was in Christ’s time more
northerly and southerly, than now it is, by twenty-four
prime minutes of a degree. ⅠⅠ. The prick in the heaven,
where the sun is the highest, called apogæum, hath varied.
For in Christ’s time, it was about the fifth degree of Ge-
mini.   And so twenty-five degrees before the beginning of
Cancer.   And now it is past the 8th degree of Cancer,
about fifty-five minutes. ⅠⅠⅠⅠ. The third is the alteration of
the sun’s distance from the centre of the earth. For the
eccentricicle of the sun is less than it was in Christ’s time by
106 parts.   And now the sun being in the ninth degree of
Cancer, he is nearer the earth than he was in Christ’s time
by 1199 of our miles.   ⅠⅤ. The fourth point is, the altera-
tion of the fixed stars, declining to the east more than in
former times, although they keep their own mutual dis-
tance.   This for Dee.
