---
edition_key: "clarendon"
license: "CC0 1.0"
source_key: "Annals of the Reformation and Establishment of Religion"
volume_key: "III-I"
---

[page 520]

[…]
  And to all the rest I add a state-book, called Leicester’s
commonwealth ; which made a great noise about these times,
exposing the earl of Leicester, queen Elizabeth’s great fa-
vourite, but not beloved by the people.   It was entitled,
Leicester’s commonwealth ; conceived, spoken, and published
with most earnest protestation of all dutiful good-will and
affection towards this realm ; for whose good only it is made
common.   But neither author, printer, or date of year ex-
pressed.   Which makes me add it under this year, or near
it, upon some probable conjectures from passages in the
book.   It was writ dialogue-wise, between a gentleman, a
lawyer, and a scholar.   It is a notable book, not sparing
that statesman, by relating a great many of his crimes, as
of blood, covetousness, ambition, &c.   But the reader must
suspend his belief of every thing that he reads there charged
upon him.   The book makes him ambitious of sovereignty ;
and shews, “ his methods of policy to obtain it, by marry-
“ ing the queen.   And in order to that, a besieging the
“ prince’s person, and by taking up the ways and passages
“ about her : his insolency in court ; his singularity in coun-
“ cil ; his violent preparations of strength abroad ; his en-
“ riching of his complices ; the banding of his faction with
“ abundance of friends every where.”   And then the author
concludes, “ What do all these things signify, but his in-
“ tent and purpose of sovereignty ?”
  These are some of the passages ; and a few more I shall
add, as a specimen of the book, being collected thence.
“ That he hindered the queen’s marriage with three princes
“ successively, suitors to her, by protesting that he himself
“ was contracted to her.   That there were continual fears
“ in her faithful subjects’ hearts, while he was about her
“ noble person.   That he swore to her that he was not mar-
“ ried to the lady Lettice, late wife of the earl of Essex,
“ though he was indeed twice married to her.   That he
“ always coveted to be furnished with certain chosen men
“ about him for divers affairs : as Baily and Culpepper,

[page 521]

“ physicians, for his agents in the university of Oxford,
“ where he was chancellor.   That there was no one college,
“ or other thing of commodity within that place, whence he
“ had not pulled whatsoever was possibly to be gathered,
“ either by art or violence.”
  Among other his chosen men about him were Dee and
Allen, two atheists, for figuring and conjuring : “ Julio the
“ Italian, and Lopez the Jew, for poisoning, and for the
“ art of destroying children in women’s bellies ; Verneis, for
“ murdering ; Digbies, for bawds, and the like other occu-
“ pations, which his lordship exercised.”
  But the queen, when she heard of this book, and divers
clamours, and base, and no doubt many false, reports dis-
persed about this her counsellor, was provoked, and caused
a severe proclamation to be set forth for calling in such
libels, and rectifying such calumnies, together with another
and better character of him.   This very book was printed
again in the year 1641 ; which was about the beginning of
king Charles the Ⅰ. his troubles ; on purpose, as it may be
thought, to make the court, or some of the council about
that king, odious to the people.
