---
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
source_key: "Autobiographical Tracts of Dr. John Dee"
---

[page 1]

The compendious rehearsall of John Dee his dutifull
declaracion, and proof of the course and race
of his studious lyfe, for the space of halfe an
hundred yeares, now (by God’s favour and helpe
fully spent, and of the very great injuries,
damages, and indignities, which for these last nyne
years he hath in England sustained, (contrary to
her Majesties very gracious will and express
commandment), made unto the two honourable
commissioners, by her most excellent Majestie
thereto assigned, according to the intent of the
most humble supplication of the said John,
exhibited to ber most gracious Majestie at
Hampton-Court. Anno 1592. Nov. 9.

Redde rationem villicationis tuæ. — Luc. X.

[page 3]

Most gracious Quene,
Forasmuch as the intollerable extremitie of the injuries and
indignities, which your most excellent Majesties faithfull and dutifull
servant, John Dee, hath for some yeares last past endured, and
still endureth, is so great and manifold, as cannot in briefe be unto
your Majestie expressed, neither without good proof and
testimonie have credit with your Majestie : and because also, without
speedy and good redress therein performed, it is to be doubted, that
great and incredible inconveniences and griefes may ensue thereof
in sundry sorte ; (which yet may easily be prevented) your
Majesties foresaid most humble and most zealously faithfull servant
beseecheth your Majestie, to assign two or mo meete and worthy
persons, nobly and vertuously minded, who may and will
charitably, indifferently, advisedly, and exactly see, heare, and perceive,
at the house of your Majestie’s said servant in Mortlake, what just
and needeful occasion he hath thus to make most humble
supplicacion unto your Majestie : and so of things their seene, heard, and
perceived, to make true and full report and description unto your
Majestie. And thus your Majestie’s foresaid most dutifull servant
beseecheth the Almighty God most mercifully, prosperously, and
allwaies to bless and preserve your most excellent Majestie royal.
Amen.
A. 1592. Nov. 9.

[...]

Be it remembred,
That this Supplication being exhibited unto her Majestie by the
honourable Countess of Warwick the 9th of November, and read
by her Majestie’s selfe ; thereupon her Majestie immediately
appointed the honourable Mr. Secretary Wolley, and Sir Thomas
Gorge, Knight, Gentleman of her Majestie’s Wardrobe, to be the
two Commissioners, according to the tenor of this Supplication.
And so, the foresaid two honourable Commissioners came the
22nd day of November, A. 1592, to my house at Mortlake, to
see, heare, and perceive some things, according to the intent of the
former Supplication. To whome being set at one table in the
midle of my late library-roome, and next before them two other
great tables, being covered ; the one, with very many letters and
recordes of fifty years course, and testimonies of my studious lyfe,
in and from the most famous places and parties of all
Christendome ; and the other with such divers books of my making,
printed and unprinted, as I had in my foresaid tyme written or
devised : then I did begin my declaration, concurring orderly with
the text of this booke, purposely and by the Commissioners’ advise,
in some order of method most briefely and speedely contrived
against this day.
