---
edition_key: "compilation"
license: "CC0 1.0
source_key: "Letters Written by John Chamberlain"
---

[page 46]

LETTER ⅩⅤⅠⅠⅠ.

[Domestic Correspondence, State Paper Office, March 1, 1598–9]

Goode Mr. Carleton,
I receved both your letters of the 12th and 20th of the last, full
fraught both with theire owne store and much other goode matter
that came in theire companie. We kepe stil at a stay and do neither
movere nor promovere, but drive on with the weather to see what
time will bringe foorth. The Erle of Essex is crased, but whether
more in body or minde is doubtfull. Thinges do not succede as he
wold wish them, but new difficulties arise daily about his
commission, as touching the time of his abode, touching his intertainment,
and touching the disposing of places and offices, upon which points
and some others he is so litle satisfied that many times he makes it
a question whether he go or not. Sir George Cariea of Cockington
(by Plymouth) is named to be Treasurer of Ireland in Sir Henry
Wallopsb place ;c but whether he be to my lords liking or no I
know not. The rebells of Mounster and Connagh are not so united
but that they have many jarres among themselves, and of late a
bickering, wherin Patricke Condon (a cheife ringleader) is saide to
be slaine or sore hurt. Here was newes that Capt. Simmes and his
companie were cut a peeces by the ennemie, but, as far as I heare
since, it was but a private quarrell, in which Simmes miscaried.
On Satterday last Sir William Woodhouse, accompanied with fowre
hacksters, understanding that Sir Robert Drury was to come from
Totnam toward London, waited for him in the way, and set upon
him as he was comming out of his coach, wounding him in three or
fowre places, and, thincking they had dispatcht him, left him for
dead, but it falles out better with him, for he is like to recover ;
marry, his man that offred himself in his masters defence was slaine
outright in the place. Upon the first alarme at the Court there was
commaundment from the Counsaile for a privie search all over this
towne to apprehend them, but within two howres after (upon what
reason I know not) it was countermaunded. Some geve out that Sir
William Woodhouse shold be likewise hurt in the face and in the
hande, but I thincke it is rather geven out to move pitie than
otherwise, for I cannot learne he was neere daunger, and the match was
very uneven, of five to two, and they taken on the sodain. The
Lady Drury (Sir Roberts mother) died some ten or twelve dayes
since, and hath left Sir John Scot a fresh widower. I wrote you
in one of my letters that Sir William Woodhouse had maried the
Lady Southwell, but the matter was mistaken, though it were
generally bruited. One Doctor Ledsam, sometimes the Quenes
Chaplain, but allwayes a giddibraind fellow, hath lately stab’d and
made away himself here in towne. The match is made up twixt
younge Norrisa and the Lady Briget, second daughter to the Erle
of Oxford. We are stil fed with fresh rumors of Don Sebastian,
that he is ipsissimus, and that the Venetians have sent ambassadors
to the King of Spaine to signifie so much unto him ; and that there
have ben some great men executed of late in Portingale about this
busines,and many others translated into Spaine ; but I will lay no
wager of all this. For lacke of better matter, I send you three or
foure toyes to passe away the time. The letter of Squires
conspiracie is well written, but the other of Dr. Dee is a ridiculous bable
of an old imposturing jugler. The Silkeworme is thought to be
Dr. Muffetts,b and in mine opinion is no bad piece of poetrie. The
treatise of Henry the Fourthc is reasonablie well written. The author
is a younge man of Cambridge toward the civill lawe. Here hath
ben much descanting about it, why such a storie shold come out at
this time, and many exceptions taken, especially to the Epistle,
which was a short thing in Latin dedicated to the Erleof Essex,
and objected to him in goode earnest, wherupon there was
commaundment it shold be cut out of the booke ; yet I have got you a
a transcript of it that you may picke out the offence if you can ; for
my part I can finde no such buggeswords, but that everything is as
it is taken. I am going the next weeke (God willing) to
Knebworth, in which consideration I am not greatly sory for your stayeng
at Ostend, for I shold have injoyed but litle of your company, which
perhaps will come better to passe at some other time. And so,
wishing you all contentment both here and there, I commit you to
God.
From London, this first of March, 1599.
Yours most assuredly,
John Chamberlain.
[Addressed as before.]

[page 158]

LETTER ⅬⅩ.

[Domestic Correspondence, State Paper Office, Nov. 4, 1602.]

SIR,
I have had leysure enough to bethincke myself how and in what
sort to thanсke you for your packet I receved at the closing up
of my last that went by Peter Browne, but the more I thincke the
lesse I am satisfied to see that wordes are but a windie requitall for
somany pretty discourses and presents, and that I have none other
meanes to acknowledge your kindnes, so that you must even put me
in the number of your doubtfull or rather desperate debtors, except
some extrordinarie goode fortune come to cleere me out of your
booke ; and now was I leaving this theme, and falling to other
matters, when your cousen Lytton calles me foorth to receve a
pacquet sent from Mussi your post, three or fowre dayes after his
arrivall, for the which I can adde nothing to that I saide before,
but rather, if it had come sooner, might chaunce have said lesse, for
leves gratiœ loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Now comming so fresh from
reading your letters and discourses of Biron, I cannot go on without
touching a point or two en passant. Let the French twaddle what
they list of his dieng en soldat, I cannot perceve by ought I have
seen or heard but that he died very timerously and childishly, which shewes
that his valour was rather a French furie, then true fortitude. Another
observation came to my remembraunce in reading his proces, of three
straunge disasters befallen three great men,a in three neighbour
countries in three yeares successively (this, you see, passes tres sequuntur
tria), and all theire cases so intricate, specially the two straungers, and
theire persons and services so magnified that a great part of the world
rests unsatisfied in their deaths, and will not be perswaded against
their deserts by any undeservings ; but mundus vult decipi, and so let
it go. I can finde neither rime nor reason in such extraordinarie
usage and entertainment of your Suisse,b being more then they were
fit to receve, and more then beseemed the King to geve to such
muffes ; so that we censure it here either for indiscretion or abjectnes ;
and for the 800,000 crownes yearly (but that you write it) I shold
hardly beleve the King wold buy them so deare. The third part of
that pension being much and more then they are worth. Your
brother and sister Carleton are both in towne about the funerall of
Mr. Marsh, his goode hoste and frend, who died apoplecticall. No
doubte but he will informe you of whatsoever he can come by.
You writ to him of the comming of your boy, of whom as yet
we have no tidings. We heare out of Spaine that ODonell,c riding
toward the Court at Valladolid, died sodainly by the way, and
being opened there was found in him a serpent(as some call it),
or rather a worme, with two heades, of eight foote longe. Matters
begin again untowardly in Mounster, where one Cormach Mac Teaghe
(or, as some terme him, Mac Dermond), a great man, being
apprehended by the Lord President for suspicion of intelligence with
Spaine, made an escape, and is out in action, together with the Lord
Roche, and divers other of his frends and followers. He had a
sonne, a proper youth, at Oxford, who was lately sent for, and
committed to the keper of the Court of Wardes. They speake of an
embargo in Spaine of all Scottish and Irish, so that they must
seeke trafficke elswhere. We have much talke of an apparition in
Wales, not far from Chester, of great troupes of horse and foote in
battell array, seene upon a mountaine by sixteen or eighteen persons
of credit, but when they came to discover what they were sodainly
vanisht. We have here foure youthes come from Moscovie to learne
our language and Latin, and are to be dispersed to divers schooles
at Winchester, Eaton, Cambridge, and Oxford. One Perkins,a a
prime man at Cambridge, and of great esteme with the precise
faction, is lately dead ; and another eclipse is befaln that
Universitie, for Dr. Plaifer, the Divinitie reader, is lately crackt in the
headpeece for the love of a wench, as some say. Sir Walter
Lewson is dead in the Fleet, and so his creditors paide in theire
eare. Mrs. Bodley hath lately lost her eldest sonne, Captaine Ball,b in
the Lowe Countries by sicknes. The young Lady North is brought
to bed of a sonne ; and the common report is that Dr. Dee hath
delivered the Lady Sandes of a devill, or of some other straunge
possession. Your Lady Thomas Norris is become a great
Catholique, and takes great care and paines to convert her sisters. I have
nothing els, but to pray you commend me to Mr. Winwod if he
be still there, and tell him the voice runs still with him for
Mr. Gilpins place ; and yet I am told there be above twenty suters,
besides Wheelerc and blacke Milles. Since before dinner I have
heard further that Sir Francis Vere hath ben robd in his chamber of
2,000l. in gold, and some say he is dead of his hurt. Besides
Captaine Ball, there be many other Captaines lately dead in the Lowe
Countries, as Lile, Clifford, Keyes, Richards, Vanifor, Deacons,
Crofts, Drake, and above fowre thousand of the sixe that went last
over. Harry Butler,a that killed Russell, is taken at Carlile, going
for Spaine, with letters for the Duke of Feria. This is all, unles I
shold tell you that a prentise, pursued by his master to be beaten,
lept out of a garret by Holbourne Bridge, and fell upon a porters
necke and got away without harme. Mr. Backhouse and Mr. Borlas
have them kindly commended to you ; and the drie-handed Knight
must not be forgotten, for he remembered it to me by a letter out of
the countrie. And so I leave you to Gods holy protection.
From London this 4th of November, 1602.
Yours most assuredly,         John Chamberlain.
The Dutch men had set out a relation of the fight with the
gallies, which we allow not, neither indeed do theire owne tales
agree ; whereupon I thought goode to send you this report of
Sir Robert Mansell, in aunswer of those drunken companions.
[Addressed,]
To my assured goode frende
Mr. Dudley Carleton
geve these.
