---
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
source_key: "The Private Diary of Dr John Dee"
---

[page 1]

	1554. Aug. 25th, Barthilmew Hikman born at Shugborowh
in Warwikshyre toward evening. My conjecture, uppon his own
reporte of circumstances. Oct. 25th, D. Daniel Vander Meulen
Antwerpiæ, mane hora quarta.*
	1555. April 22nd, Jane Fromonds borne at Cheyham at none.
Aug. 1st, Ed. Kelly natus hora quarta a meridie† ut annotatum
reliquit pater ejus. Oct. 12th, the Lord Willughby born hora
septima mane, ante meridiem, Lat. 51° 30′, at Wesell in Gel-
derland.
	1557. July 30th, Mr. Arundell of Cornwayle natus circa [horam]
quartam a meridie.
	1558. Dec. 14th, Mary Nevelle, alias Mary Lewknor, borne
inter 11 et meridiem mane, by Chichester.
	1560. July 8th, Margaret Russell Cowntess of Cumberland,
hora 2 min. 9 Exoniæ mane.
	1561. Aug. 14th, Mr. Heydon, of Baconsthorp in Norfolk,
hora noctis 11½ natus in comitatu Surrey.
	1563. March 23rd, Mr. William Fennar a meridie inter horam
undecimam et duodecimam nocte. June 23rd, Jane Cooper, now

	* It is almost unnecessary to observe that this and the following are notes of
nativities. They are not for the most part contemporary notices, but apparently
inserted at various times by Dee when professionally consulted as an astrologer.
	† “ Anno 1555, Aug. 1, hora quarta a meridie Wigorniæ natus Dominus Edouardus
Kelæus,” MS. Ashm. 1788, fol. 140, where there is a horoscope of this nativity in
the handwriting of Dr. Dee. Ashmole, in his MS. 1790, fol. 58, says “ Mr. Lilly
told me that John Evans informed him that he was acquainted with Kelly’s sister in
Worcester, that she shewed him some of the gold her brother had transmuted, and that
Kelly was first an apothecary in Worcester.”

[page 2]

Mystris Kelly, toward evening. Sept. 28th, Mr. John Ask
ante meridiem, by York six myle on this syde ; Elizabeth
Mownson, circa horam 9 mane, soror magistri Thomæ Mownson
et uxor magistri Brown.
	1564. Mrs. Brigit Cooke borne about seven of the clok on
Saynt David’s Day, which is the first day of March, being Wens-
day ; but I cannot yet lerne whether it was before none or after.
But she thinketh herself to be but 27 yeres old, anno 1593,
Martii primo, but it cannot be so. June 20th, Mr. Hudson, hora
septima ante meridiem. Aug. 21st, Wenefride Goose, inter 9 et
10 a meridie by Kingstone.
	1565. Sept. 12th, John Pontoys, inter 9 et 10 ante meridiem
prope Stony-Stratford ; puto potius hora 8 min. 43. Oct. 17th,
Thomas Kelley* hora quarta a meridie Wurceter. Dec. 21st,
Mr. Thomas Mownson at 11 of the clok in the morning.
	1568. July 14th, William Emery born at Danbery in Essex
paulo post undecimam horam noctis. Sept. 24th, Margaret Ander-
son mane inter 7 et 8.
	1571. Samuel Swallow borne at Thaxstede in Essex Feb. 15
ante meridiem, inter horam undecimam et duodecimam, forte hora
media post undecimam.
	1575. July 31st, Simeon Stuard natus ante diluculum per horam
11½ at Shinfelde ; his grandfather by the mother was Dr. Huyck
the Quene’s physicien.
	1577. Jan. 16th, the Erle of Lecester, Mr. Phillip Sydney, Mr.
Dyer, &c., came to my howse.† Jan. 22nd, The Erle of Bedford

	* The brother of the celebrated astrologer before mentioned.
	† “ Dr. Dee dwelt in a house neere the water side, a little westward from the church
[at Mortlake]. The buildings which Sir Fr. Crane erected for working of tapestry
hangings, and are still (1673) employed to that use, were built upon the ground whereon
Dr. Dee’s laboratory and other roomes for that use stood. Upon the west is a square
court, and the next is the house wherein Dr. Dee dwelt, now inhabited by one Mr.
Selbury, and further west his garden. ”— MS. Ashm. 1788, fol. 149. The same
account says that “ Dr. Dee was wel beloved and respected of all persons of quality
thereabouts, who very often invited him to their houses or came to his.”

[page 3]

cam to my howse. Feb. 19th, great wynde S.W., close, clowdy.
March 11th, my fall uppon my right nuckul bone, hora 9 fere
mane ; wyth oyle of Hypericon in 24 howres eased above all hope :
God be thanked for such his goodness of his creatures ! March
24th, Alexander Simon the Ninivite came to me, and promised
me his servise into Persia. May 1st, I received from M. William
Harbert of St. Gillian his notes uppon my Monas.* May 2nd, I
understode of one Vincent Murfyn his abhominable misusing me
behinde my back ; Mr. Thomas Besbich told me his father is one
of the cokes of the Court. May 20th, I hyred the barber of
Cheswik, Walter Hooper, to kepe I hedges and knots in as good
order as he sed them than, and that to be done with twise cutting
in the yere at the least and he to have yerely five shillings, [and]
meat and drink. June 10th, circa 10, a shower of hayle and rayne.
June 18th, borrowed £40 of John Hilton of Fulham. June 19th,
I understode of more of Vincent Murfyn his knavery ; borrowed
£20 of Bartylmew Newsam. June 20th, borow £27 uppon the
chayn of golde. June 26th, Elen Lyne gave me a quarter’s warn-
ing. June 27th, showrs of rayne and hayle. Aug. 19th, the
Hexameron Brytanicum put to printing.†
	Nov. 3rd, William Rogers of Mortlak, abowt 7 of the clok in
the morning, cut his own throte, by the fende his instigation.
Nov. 6th, Sir Umfrey Gilbert cam to me to Mortlak. Nov. 18th,
borowed of Mr. Edward Hynde of Mortlak £30 to be repayed
at Hallowtyde next yere. Nov. 20th, two tydes in the forenone,

	* This of course is his celebrated Monas Hieroglyphica, frequently printed, and the
nature of which I attempted to explain in a paper read before the Society of Antiqua-
ries. Mr. Herbert, according to MS. Ashm. 1788, “ dwelt then in Mortlack and was
an intimate friend of Dr. Dee’s.”
	† This was his work printed in 1577 under the title of General and Rare Memorials
pertayning to the perfect Art of Navigation, in folio, now a book of the greatest rarity.
The original manuscript of it is in MS. Ashm. 1789, and Dee’s own copy of the pub-
lished work with MS. notes and additions is preserved in the British Museum. In his
Letter Apologetical, 4to. Lond. 1603, he cites this work under the title of The Brytish
Monarchie, as having been written in the year 1576.

[page 4]

the first 2 or 3 howres to sone. Nov. 22nd, I rod to Windsor to
the Q. Majestie. Nov. 25th, I spake with the Quene hora quinta.
Nov. 28th, I spake with the Quene hora quinta ; I spake with
Mr. Secretary Walsingham.* I declared to the Quene her title
to Greenland, Estetiland, and Friseland.
	Dec. 1st, I spake with Sir Christofer Hatton ; he was made
knight that day. Dect. 1st, I went from the cowrte at Wyndsore.
Dec. 30th, inexplissima illa calumnia de R. Edwardo, iniquissime
aliqua ex parte in me denunciabatur : ante aliquos elapsos dies,
sed . . . . . . . sua sapientia me innocentem.
	1578. Feb. 5th, sponsalia cum Jana Fromonds horam circiter
primam. April 28th, I caused Sir Rowland Haywood to examyn
Francys Baily of his sklandering me, which he denyed utterly. June
13th, rayn and in the afternone a little thunder. June 30th, I told
Mr. Daniel Rogers†, Mr. Hackluyt of the Middle Temple being
by, that Kyng Arthur and King Maty, both of them, did conquier
Gelindia, lately called Friseland, which he so noted presently in
his written copy of Monumethensis‡, for he had no printed boke
therof. July 14th, my sister-in-law Elizabeth Fromonds cam to me.
July 27th, hora 9, min. 15 a meridie Francis Cowntess of Hert-
ford.
	Aug. 5th, Mr. Raynolds of Bridewell tok his leave of me as he
passed toward Darthmowth to go with Sir Umfry Gilbert toward
Hocheleya. Aug. 15th, I went toward Norwich with my work of
Imperium Brytanicum.§ Aug. 23rd, I cam to London from Nor-
wich. Aug. 31st, I went to my father-in-law Mr. Fromonds to
Cheyham.

	* Ashmole informs us that Walsingham continued for a length of time one of Dr.
Dee’s best patrons.
	† Rogers was a member of the University of Oxford, and a large commonplace-book
in his handwriting is in Archbishop Tenison’s library in St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields.
	‡ That is, Galfridus Monumetensis de gestis regum Britanniæ. Hackluyt
mentions this fact in his collection of voyages.
	§ This is the book just mentioned under the title of General and Rare Memorials, fol.
Lond. 1577.

[page 5]

	Sept. 1st, I cam from Cheyham. Sept. 6th, Elen Lyne, my
mayden, departed from this life immediately after the myd-day
past, when she had lyne sik a month lacking one day. Sept. 12th,
Jane Gaele cam to my servyce, and she must have four nobles by
the yere, 26s. 8d. Sept. 25th, Her Majestie cam to Richemond
from Grenwich. Sept. 26th, the first rayn that came for many a day ;
all pasture abowt us was withered : rayn afternone like Aprill
showres. Oct. 8th, the Quene’s Majestie had conference with me
at Richemond inter 9 et 11. Oct. 16th, Dr. Bayly conferred of
the Quene her disease. Oct. 22nd, Jane Fromonds went to the
court at Richemond. Oct. 25th, a fit from 9 afternone to 1 after
mydnight. Oct. 28th, the Erle of Lecester and Sir Francys Wal-
singham, secretary, determined my going over for the Quene’s
Majestie. Nov. 4th, I was directed to my voyage by the Erle of
Lecester and Mr. Secretary Walsingham hora nona. Nov. 7th,
I cam to Gravesende. Nov. 9th, I went from Lee to sea. Nov.
14th, I cam to Hamburgh hora tertia. Dec. 11th, to Franckfurt-
uppon-Oder. Dec. 15th, newes of Turnifer’s comming hora
octava mane, by a speciall mesenger.
	1579. A moyst Marche and not wyndy. June 10th, I shewed
to Mr. John Lewis and his sonne, the physition, the manner of
drawing aromaticall oyles. At that tyme my cat got a fledge yong
sparrow which had onely a right wyng naturally. June 15th, my
mother surrendred Mortlak howses and land, and had state geven
in plena curia ad terminum vitæ, and to me was also the reversion
delivered per virgam, and to my wife Jane by me, and after to my
heirs and assignes for ever, to understand, Mr. Bullok and Mr.
Taylor, surveyor, at Wimbledon, under the tree by the church.
June 22nd, Mr. Richard Hickman and Barthilmew his nephew
cam to me with Mr. Flowr, commended by Mr. Vicechamberlayn
Sir Christopher Hatton.
	July 6th, Mr. Hitchcok, who had travayled in the plat for
fishing, made acquayntance with me, and offred me great curtesy.

[page 6]

July 13th, Arthurus Dee natus* puer mane hor. 4 min. 30 fere,
vel potius min. 25, in ipso ortu solis, ut existimo. After 10 of the
clock this night my wive’s father Mr. Fromonds was speechles,
and died on Tuesday (July 14th) at 4 of the clock in the morning.
July 16th, Arthur was christened at 3 of the clok afternone ;
Mr. Dyer and Mr. Doctor Lewys, judg of the Admiralty, were his
godfathers ; and Mistres Blanche Pary of the Privie Chamber his
godmother. But Mr. John Harbert of Estshene was deputy for
Dr. Lewys, and Mystres Awbrey was deputy for my cosen Mistres
Blanche Pary.
	Aug. 8th, John Elmeston†, student of Oxford, cam to me for
dialling. Aug. 9th, Jane Dee churched. Aug. 16th, Monsieur
cam secretly to the court from Calays. Aug. 20th, wyndy, clowdy,
rayny. Aug. 26th, Monsieur went back agayn to France. Sept.
10th, my dream of being naked, and my skyn all overwrowght
with work like some kinde of tuft mockado, with crosses blew
and red ; and on my left arme, abowt the arme, in a wreath, this
word I red — sine me nihil potestis facere : and another the same
night of Mr. Secretary Walsingham, Mr. Candish, and myself.
	Oct. 3rd, Sir Leonel Ducket his unkend letter for mony. Oct.
4th, Goodman Hilton requested me for his ij. sonnes to resort to
my howse. Oct. 5th, raging wynde at West and Southerly, in the
night chefely. Oct. 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, great rayne for three or
four dayes and nights. Oct. 13th, this day it broke up ; the fote
bote for the ferry at Kew was drowned and six persons, by the
negligens of the ferryman overwhelming the boat uppon the roap
set there to help, by reason of the vehement and high waters.
Oct. 18th, Mr. Adrian Gilbert and John Davys reconcyled them-
selves to me, and disclosed some of Emery his most unhonest,

	* His horoscope is in MS. Ashm. 1788. “ Mr. Arthur Dee’s birth was accompanied
by the unhappy accident of the death of Mr. Fromonds, his mother’s father, who died
that morning.” — MS. Ashm. 1790, fol. 63.
	† This person is not noticed by the Oxford biographers.

[page 7]

hypocriticall, and devilish dealings and devises agaynst me and
other, and likewise of that errant strompet her abominable wordes
and dedes ; and John Davis sayd that he might curse the tyme
that ever he knew Emery, and so much followed his wicked cown-
sayle and advyse. So just is God ! Oct. 31st, payed xxs. fyne
for me and Jane my wife to the Lord of Wimbleton (the Quene),
by goodman Burton of Putney, for the surrender taken of my
mother of all she hath in Mortlak to Jane and me, and than to
my heyres and assynes, &c.
	Nov. 25th, The Lord Clinton cam to me and offred Skirbeck by
Boston for Long Lednam. Nov. 29th, I receyved a letter from
Mr. Thomas Jones. Dec. 9th, Θις νιγτ μι υυιφ δρεμιδ θατ ονε καμ
το ἑρ ανδ τουχεδ ἑρ, σαιινγ, Μιστρες Δεε, yου αρ κονκειυεδ οφ χιλδ,
ὑος ναμε μυστ βε Ζαχαριας ; βε οφ γυδ χερε, ἑ σαλ δο υυελ ας θις
δοθ ! * Dec. 22nd, I payd Jane 13s. and 4d. for her wagys tyll
Michelmas last, for the half yere, so that I owe her yet 6s. 8d.
Dec. 28th, I reveled to Roger Coke † the gret secret of the elixir
of the salt οφ ακετελς ονε υππον α υνδρεδ.
	1580. Jan. 13th, I gave my wife mony for the month. Jan. 16th,
Arthur fell sick, stuffed with cold fleym, could not slepe, had no
stomach to eat or drink as he had done before. Feb. 26th, this
night the fyre all in flame cam into my maydens chamber agayne,
betwene an eleven and twelve of the cloke ; contynued half an
howr terribly, so it did a yere before to the same maydens, Mary
Cunstable and Jane Gele. May 17th, at the Moscovy howse for
the Cathay voyage. June 3rd, Mr. A. Gilbert and J. Davys rod
homward into Devonshire. June 7th, Mr. Skydmor and his wife

	* Dee has occasionally made use of Greek letters for the preservation of his notes,
still retaining the English language. The present passage may as well be given : —
 “ This night my wife dreamed that one cam to her and touched her, saying, ‘ Mistres
Dee, you are conceived of child, whose name must be Zacharias ; be of good chere, he
sal do well as this doth ! ’”
	† In a more appropriate place I shall give from an Ashmolean manuscript a tradi-
tionary anecdote relating to this Roger Coke, or Cooke, and the great secret which
Dee revealed to him.

[page 8]

lay at my howse and Mr. Skydmor’s dowghter, and the Quene’s
dwarf Mrs. Tomasin. June 8th, my wife went with Mistres
Skydmor to the court. June 12th, Mr. Zackinson and Mr.
Cater lay at my howse, having supped at my Lady Crofts.
June 14th, Mr. Fosku of the Wardrip lay at my howse, and went
the next day to London with Mr. Coweller. July 15th, the Lady
Croft went from Mortlak to the court at Otlands. June 30th,
payd Jane 20s. for thre quarters’ wages, so that all that is due is
payd, and all other recknengs likewise is payd her 6s. 8d. ; and
Mary Constable was payd all old reknings 15s., and my wife had
11 pounds, to dischardge all for thirteen wekes next, that is,
till the 5th of November : I delivered Mr. Williams, the person
of Tendring, a lettre of atturney agaynst one White of
Colchester, for a sklaundre.
	Aug. 27th, Arthur was weaned this night first. Aug. 28th, my
dealing with Sir Humfrey Gilbert for his graunt of discovery.
Aug. 30th, Nurse Darant was discharged and had 10s. given her,
which was the whole quarter’s wages due at a fortnight after
Michelmas.
	Sept. 6th, The Quene’s Majestie cam to Richemond. Sept. 10th,
Sir Humfry Gilbert graunted me my request to him, made by
letter, for the royaltyes of discovery all to the North above the
parallell of the 50 degree of latitude, in the presence of Stoner,
Sir John Gilbert, his servant or reteiner ; and thereuppon toke
me by the hand with faithfull promises in his lodging of John
Cooke’s howse in Wichcross strete, where wee dyned onely us three
together, being Satterday. Sept. 13th, Mr. Lock browght Ben-
jamyn his sonne to me : his eldest sonne also, called Zacharie,
cam then with him. Sept. 17th, The Quene’s Majestie cam from
Rychemond in her coach, the higher way of Mortlak felde, and
whan she cam right against the church she turned down toward
my howse : and when she was against my garden in the felde she
stode there a good while, and than cam ynto the street at the
great gate of the felde, where she espyed me at my doore making

[page 9]

obeysains to her Majestie ; she beckend her hand for me ; I cam
to her coach side, she very speedily pulled off her glove and gave
me her hand to kiss ; and to be short, asked me to resort to her
court, and to give her to wete when I cam ther ; hor. 6¼ a meridie.
Sept. 14th, I began against Vincent Murphyn. Sept. 15th, I
wrote to the bishop of London. Sept. 22nd, my declaration
against Vincent Murphin put into the court of Geldhall.
	Oct. 3rd, on Munday, at 11 of the clok before none, I de-
livered my two rolls of the Quene’s Majesties title unto herself in
the garden at Richemond, who appointed after dynner to heare
furder of the matter. Therfore betwene one and two afternone,
I was sent for into her highnes Pryvy Chamber, where the
Lord Threasurer allso was, who, having the matter slightly
then in consultation, did seme to dowt much that I had or
could make the argument probable for her highnes’ title so as I
pretended. Wheruppon I was to declare to his honor more
playnely, and at his leyser, what I had sayd and could say therin,
which I did on Tuesday and Wensday following, at his chamber,
where he used me very honorably on his behalf. Oct. 7th, on
Fryday I cam to my Lord Threasorer, and he, being told of my
being without, and allso I standing before him at his comming
furth, did not or would not speak to me, I dowt not of some new
greif conceyved. Oct. 10th, the Quene’s Majestie, to my great
cumfort (hora quinta), cam with her trayn from the court and at
my dore graciously calling me to her, on horsbak, exhorted me
briefly to take my mother’s death patiently, and withall told me
that the Lord Threasorer had gretly commended my doings for her
title, which he had to examyn, which title in two rolls he had
browght home two howrs before ; she remembred allso how at my
wive’s death it was her fortune likewise to call uppon me.* At 4

	* His first wife died on the 16th of March 1575, when “ the Queen’s Majestie, with
her most honourable Privy Council, and other her Lords and Nobility, came purposely
to have visited my library : but finding that my wife was within four houres before
buried out of the house, her Majestie refused to come in; but willed to fetch my glass

[page 10]

of the clok in the morning my mother Jane Dee dyed at Mortlak ;
she made a godly ende : God be praysed therfore ! She was 77
yere old. Oct. 20th, I had by my jury at Geldhall £100 damages
awarded me against Vincent Murphyn the cosener. Oct. 22nd,
with much ado I had judgment against Murfin at Geldhall. My
mervaylous horsnes and in manner spechelesnes toke me, being
nothing at all otherwise sick. Oct. 25th, Morrice Kyffin departed
from me with my leave. Nov. 2nd; the Lord Threasorer sent me
a haunche of venison. Thomas Suttley had the bishop of Can-
terbury his letter for Sir Richard. Nov. 3rd, I writt to my Lord
Threasurer. Nov. 6th, Helen cam to my servyse. Nov. 12th,
somwhat better in my voyce. Nov. 22nd, the blasing star* I
cold see no more, though it were a cler night. Dec. 1st, newes
cam by Dr. Deny from Ireland of the Italiens overthrow whom
the Pope had sent, the Quene lying at Richemond. Dec. 6th,
the Quene removed from Richmond. Dec. 8th, recepi literas
Roma, scriptas per fratrem Laudervicea.
	1581.†  Feb. 9th, I agreed with Mr. Gentle Godolphin for to
release the coosener Vincent Murphin. Feb. 11th, Harry Prise, of
Lewsam, cam to me at Mortlak, and told of his dreames often re-
peated, and uppon my prayer to God this night, his dreame was
confirmed, and better instruction given. Feb. 12th, Sir William
Harbert cam to Mortlak. Feb. 23rd, I made acquayntance with
Joannes Bodinus, in the Chambre of Presence at Westminster,
the embassador being by from Monsieur. Feb. 26th, a very fayr
calm warm day.

so famous, and to show unto her some of the properties of it, which I did ; her Ma-
jestie being taken down from her horse by the Earle of Leicester, Master of the Horse,
at the church wall of Mortlake, did see some of the properties of that glass, to her
Majestie’s great contentment and delight.” — Compendious Memorial, p. 516. This
glass is spoken of again.
	* Dee has made a rough sketch of the appearance of this comet, with its long tail,
on the margin of the MS.
	† An original diary of the chemical experiments made by Dr. Dee in this year is
preserved in the Bodleian Library. — MS. Rawl. Miscel. 241.

[page 11]

	March 8th, it was the 8 day, being Wensday, hora noctis 10,
11, the strange noyse in my chamber of knocking ; and the voyce,
ten tymes repeted, somewhat like the shrich of an owle, but more
longly drawn, and more softly, as it were in my chamber. March
12th, all reckenings payd to Mr. Hudson, £11. 17s. March 13th,
Elizabeth Kyrton cam to my servys. March 23rd, at Mortlak
cam to me Hugh Smyth, who had returned from Magellan
straights and Vaygatz ; after that, raynie, stormie wynde, S.W.
March 25th, Helen was hyred at our Lady day for the yere for
fowr nobles wagis ; she had her covenant peny, and allso vjs. viijd.
for her payns taken synce she came. April 3rd, I ryd toward Sned-
greene, to John Browne, to here and see the manner of the
doings. April 14th, I cam home from Snedgreene. May 25th,
I had sight in Χρυσταλλω offerd me, and I saw. June 7th, hora 7½
mane nata est Katharina Dee. June 10th, baptisata a meridie
hor. 5½ Katharina. Mr. Packington of the court, my Lady Ka-
tarin Crofts, wife to Sir James Crofts, Mr. Controller of the
Quene’s household, Mystres Mary Skydmor of the Privie Cham-
ber, and cosen to the Quene, by theyr deputies christened Katha-
rin Dee. June 17th, yong Mr. Hawkins, who had byn with Sir
Francis Drake, cam to me to Mortlake. June 30th, Mr. John
Leonard Haller, of Hallerstein, by Worms in Germany, receyved
his instructions manifold for his jornay to Quinsay, which jornay
I moved him unto, and instructed him plentifully for the variation
of the compas, observing in all places as he passed.
  July 6th, my wife churched. July 7th, in the morning at 1¾
after mydnight, Mr. Hinde his sonne born. July 10th, my right
sholder and elbow-joynt were so extremely in payn that I was
not able in 14 dayes to lift my arme owtward not an ynche ; the
payn was extreme ; I used Mr. Larder, Mr. Alles, and Alise Da-
vyes, and abowt the 25 day I mended. July 12th, abowt 10 of
the clock ½ before noone ρογερ ἱς ινκρεδιβλε δογγεδνες ανδ ινγρατε-
φυλνες αγαινς με το μι φακε, αλμοστ ρεδι το λαι υιολεντ ανδς ον με, μαγερ
ενρικ καν παρτελι τελ. At the same day the Erle of Lecester fell

[page 12]

fowly owt with the Erle of Sussex, Lord Chamberlayn, calling
each other traytor, whereuppon both were commanded to kepe
theyr chambers at Greenwich, wher the court was. July 19th,
Mr. Henrick went to London to visit his wife and children. July
26th, Mr. Haylok cam, and goodman King with him. July 28th,
Mr. Collens did ride into Lincolneshire.
	Aug. 3rd, all the night very strange knocking and rapping in
my chamber. Aug. 4th, and this night likewise. Katharin was sent
home from nurse Maspely, of Barnes, for fear of her mayd’s sick-
nes, and goodwife Benet gave her suck. Aug. 11th, Katharine
Dee was shifted to nurse Garret at Petersham on Fryday, the
next day after St. Lawrence day, being the 11th day of the month ;
my wife went on foot with her, and Ellen Cole, my mayd,
George and Benjamin, in very great showres of rayn. Aug. 12th,
recepi literas a D. Doctore Andrea Hess occultæ philosophiæ
studioso, per Richardi Hesketh amici mei, Antwerpiæ agentis, dili-
gentiam in negociis meis, et recepi, una cum literis, Mercurii Men-
sitam seu Sigillam Planetarum. Aug. 26th, abowt 8½ (at night) a
strange meteore in forme of a white clowde crossing galaxiam,
whan it lay north and sowth over our zenith ; this clowd was at
length from the S.E. to the S.W. sharp at both endes, and in
the west ende it was forked for a while ; it was abowt sixty
degrees high, it lasteth an howr, all the skye clere abowt, and fayr
starshyne.
	Sept.* 5th, Roger Cook, who had byn with me from his 14
yeres of age till 28, of a melancholik nature, pycking and devising
occasions of just cause to depart on the suddayn, abowt 4 of the
clok in the afternone requested of me lycense to depart, wher-
uppon rose whott words between us ; and he, imagining with his-
self that he had the 12 of July deserved my great displeasure and
finding himself barred from vew of my philosophicall dealing

	* Dr. Dee in the Rawlinson MS. just quoted, observes, in his notes on this month,
“ Mr. Harry Waters went away the 2nd day, malcontent. John Dee, Jesus bless
me ! ”

[page 13]

with Mr. Henrik, thowght that he was utterly recest from intended
goodnes toward him. Notwithstanding Roger Cook his un-
seamely dealing, I promised him, yf he used himself toward me
now in his absens, one hundred pounds * as sone as of my own
clene hability I myght spare so much ; and moreover, if he used
himself well in lif toward God and the world, I promised him
some pretty alchimicall experiments, whereuppon he might ho-
nestly live. Sept. 7th, Roger Cook went for alltogether from me.
Sept. 29th, Robert Gardner, of Shrewsbury, cam to my servyce.
	Oct. 8th, I had newes of the chests of bokes fownd by Owndle
in Northamptonshyre ; Mr. Barnabas Sawle told me of them, but
I fownd no truth in it. Oct. 9th, Barnabas Saul, lying in the
. . . . . . . . hall was strangely trubled by a spirituall creature
abowt mydnight. Oct. 13th, I rod to Sowth Myms. Oct. 14th,
to St. Nedes. Oct. 16th, at Mr. Hikman’s. Oct. 23rd, at Tos-
seter. Oct. 21st, Oxford, Dr. Cradocke. Oct. 23rd, from Oxford
to Wyckam. Oct. 24th, I cam home. Robert Hilton cam to my
service. Nov. 16th, the Quene removed to White Hall, and Mon-
sieur with her. Nov. 27th, I rod to Greensede. Nov. 28th, to
goodman Wykham, 2 myles beyond Chayly by Lewys. Nov. 29th,
I made acquayntance with Mr. George Kylmer for Sir George his
bokes. Nov. 30th, I cam home. Dec. 1st, Katharyn Dee her
nurse was payd 6s. so nothing is owing to her. Dec. 5th, Elen
my mayden fell sick. Dec. 7th, George my man had the great
fall of the ladder, hora 10 fere mane. Dec. 8th, I sent a letter to
Mr. Kylmer. Dec. 22nd, my Lord Chanceler’s sonne, Mr. Brom-
ley, and Sir William Herbert cam to me. Helen Cole was payd
her wages and reckening tyll this Christmas, and so discharged my
servyce, being newly recovered of her ague. Her desyre was to
go to her frendes.
	1582. Jan. 11th, Robert Gardener desired my leave to go dwell

	* This probably gave rise to the anecdote which is related in MS. Ashm. 1788, fol.
147, viz. that “ he revealed to one Roger Cooke the great secret of the elixar, as he
called it, of the salt of metalls, the projection whereof was one upon an hundred.”

[page 14]

with Sir William Herbert, hora 12. Jan. 16th, Mistris Harbert
cam to Essexe. Jan. 17th, Randal Hatton cam home from
Samuel’s father at Stratton Audley. Jan. 22nd, Arthur Dee and
Mary Herbert, they being but 3 yere old the eldest, did make as
it wer a shew of childish marriage, of calling ech other husband
and wife. Jan. 22, 23rd. The first day Mary Herbert cam to her
father’s hous at Mortlak, and the second day she cam to her
father’s howse at Estshene. Jan. 23rd, My wife went to nurse
Garret and payd her for this month ending the 26 day. Jan. 27th,
Barnabas Sawl his brother cam. Feb. 12th, abowt 9 of the clok,
Barnabas Saul and his brother Edward went homward from
Mortlak : Saul his inditement being by law fownd insufficient at
Westminster Hall : Mr. Serjeant Walmesley, Mr. Owen and Mr.
Hyde, his lawyers at the bar for the matter, and Mr. Ive, the
clerk of the Crown Office, favouring the other. Feb. 20th, Mr.
Bigs of Stentley by Huntingdon and John Littlechild cam to me.
I receyved a letter from Barnabas Saul. Feb. 21st, Mr. Skull-
thorp rod toward Barnabas. Feb. 25th, Mr. Skulthorp cam
home. Payd nurse Garret for Katharin tyll Fryday the 23 day,
vjs. then somethyng due to nurse for iij. pownd of candell and 4
pownd of sope.
	March 1st, Mr. Clerkson browght Magnus to me at Mortlak,
and so went that day agayn. March 6th, Barnabas Saul cam this
day agayn abowt one of the clok and went to London the same
afternone. He confessed that he neyther hard or saw any spiri-
tuall creature any more. March 8th, Mr. Clerkson and his frende
cam to my howse. Barnabas went home agayn abowt 3 or 2
clok, he lay not at my howse now ; he went, I say, on Thursday,
with Mr. Clerkson. March 8th, cœlum ardere et instar san-
guinis in diversis partibus rubere visum est circa horam nonam
noctis, maxime versus septentrionalem et occidentalem partem :
sed ultra capita nostra versus austrum frequenter miles quasi
sanguineus. March 9th, Fryday at dynner tyme Mr. Clerkson and

[page 15]

Mr. Talbot* declared a great deale of Barnabas nowghty dealing
toward me, as in telling Mr. Clerkson ill things of me that I
should mak his frend, as that he was wery of me, that I wold so
flatter his frende the lerned man that I wold borow him of him.
But his frend told me, before my wife and Mr. Clerkson, that a
spirituall creature told him that Barnabas had censured both Mr.
Clerkson and me. The injuries which this Barnabas had done
me diverse wayes were very great. March 22nd, Mr. Talbot
went to London, to take his jornay.

	April 16th, Nurse Garet had her 6s. for her month ending on
the 20th day. April 22nd, A goodly showr of rayn this morning
early. May 4th, Mr. Talbot went. May 13th, Jane rod to
Cheyham. May 15th, nocte circa nonam cometa apparuit in sep-
tentrione versus occidentem aliquantulum ; cauda versus astrum
tendente valde magna, et stella ipsa vix sex gradus super horizon-
tem. May 20th, Robertus Gardinerus Salopiensis lætum mihi
attulit nuncium de materia lapidis, divinitus sibi revelatus de
qua . . . . . May 23rd, Robert Gardener declared unto me
hora 4½ a certeyn great philosophicall secret, as he had termed it,
of a spirituall creatuer, and was this day willed to come to me
and declare it, which was solemnly done, and with common
prayer. May 28th, Mr. Eton of London cam with his son-in-
law Mr. Edward Bragden, as concerning Upton parsonage, to
have me to resign or let it unto his said son-in-law, whom I pro-
mised to let understand whenever myself wold consent to forego
it. June 9th, I writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury a letter in
Latin : Mr. Doctor Awbrey did carry it. June 14th, Morryce
Kyffin did viset me. June 22nd, Nurse Garret had 6s. for a
month ending the 18 day of May ; she is to have for a month

	* Just above this relation some one has written, “ you that rede this underwritten
assure yourselfe that yt is a shamfull lye, for Talbot neither studied for any such thinge
nor shewed himselfe dishonest in any thinge.” Dr. Dee has thus commented upon
it : — “ This is Mr. Talbot or that lerned man, his own writing in my boke, very un-
duely as he cam by it.” There are several other notices of Talbot erased, but
whether by him or by the Doctor it is impossible to say, but most probably the former.

[page 16]

wages ending the 15 day of this June. My wife went this Friday
thither with Benjamyn. June 27th, Mystris Stafford arrested
me hora 11 : I payd all.
	July 3rd, hor. 12¼, Arthur Dee fell from the top of the Water-
gate Stayres down to the fote from the top, and cut his forhed on
the right eyebrow. Sir Richard browght the rent. July 6th, in
feare of resting by proctor Lewys : tyll 9½ at night from 1 afternone
at the Docter’s comming. July 12th, Proctor Lewys agred withall.
July 13th, Mr. Talbot cam abowt 3 of the clok afternone, with
whom I had some wordes of unkendnes : we parted frendely : he
sayd that the Lord Morley had the Lord Mountegle his bokes.
He promised me some of Doctor Myniver’s bokes. July 16th,
Mr. William Pole, whome Phillip Simons, somtymes barber to
the old Erle of Tavistok, doth knowe, cam to me, and made ac-
quayntance with me : promised to com agayn within xiiij. dayes.
Jane my wife went to Nurse Garret’s to pay her 12s. for her
wages due tyll Friday last, which was Saint Margaret’s day, and
brought her xijd. for candles : she went by water ; Mistres Lee
went with her, and Robyn Jackesbite. Jane this night was sore
trubbled with a collick and cramp in her belly ; she vomyted this
Monday more, and every night grew stiff in the sole likewise.
A meridie hor. 3½ cam Sir George Peckham to me to know the
tytle for Norombega in respect of Spayn and Portugall parting the
whole world’s distilleryes. He promysed me of his gift and of
his patient . . . . . . . of the new conquest, and thought to get so
moche of Mr. Gerardes gift to be sent me with seale within a few
days. July 18th, Barthilmew Knaresburgh his sone borne at
break of day abowt 3 of the clok. June 19th, Barnabas Saul
came to see me at Mortlak : I chyd hym for his manifold un-
true reports. July 23d, Mistris Franklin’s sone borne at noone.
July 24th, Robert Gardiner cam, and went on the 26th.
	Aug. 8th, Kate was sickly. Aug. 11th, Mr. Bacon and Mr.
Phillips of the court cam. Aug. 20th, Katarine still seemed to be
diseasid. Aug. 25th, Katharin was taken home from nurse Garret

[page 17]

of Petersham, and weaned at home. Aug. 31st, Benjamin Lock
told me of his father’s mynde to send him to Spayn within three
or four days. Sept. 1st, I did for Sir John Killegrew devise the
way of protestation to save him harmless for compounding with
Spaniard who was robbed : he promised me fish against Lent.
Sept. 10th, Mr. John Leonard Haller, of Hallersteyn, by Worms
in Germany, cam agayn to me, to declare his readines to go to-
ward Quinsay ; and how he wold go and ly at Venys all this
winter, and from thens to Constantinople. I requested Mr.
Charles Sted to help him to make his mony over to Paris and
Nuremberg, and to help him with the sercher of Rye to pass his
horse, and to help him with Mr. Osborn the alderman with his
letters to Constantinople. Sept. 11th, on Tuesday they went to
London together, and my wife allso abowt her affayres. Sept.
13th, I writt to Dugenes de Dionigiis to Venys by Mr. John Leo-
nard Haller. Sept. 17th, I writ to the Erle of Osmond. Sept.
29th, Anne cam to my servyse from Mr. Harbert. I payd Mr.
Lewys £20, so rest is which I challendg as for my cost and payns
for 37 yeres for John his son.
	Oct. 12th, I rod to Tundridge. Oct. 13th, I rod from Tun-
dridge to Mr. Coverts at Slawgham. Oct. 15th, I cam home from
Slawgham, and dyned at Mr. Holtens, person of Oxstede by Tun-
dridge, a phisitien. Oct. 21st, Jane my wife sowned in the
church. Nov. 1st, Mr. Plat, my brother Yong his sonne-in-law,
cam to me with a stranger of Trushen, born at Regius Mons :
his name is Martinus Faber. The same day cam Mr. Clement the
seamaster and Mr. Ingram from Sir George Peckham. Nov. 8th,
hayle afternone horam circiter primam : tonitrus circa quartam
et sextam. Nov. 9th, Mr. Newbury, who had byn at Cambaya
in Inde, cam to me. Nov. 22nd, E. K. went to London, and so the
next day conveied by rode toward Blakley, and within ten dayes
to returne. Nov. 24th, Saterday night I dremed that I was deade,
and afterward my bowels wer taken out I walked and talked with
diverse, and among other with the Lord Thresorer who was com

[page 18]

to my howse to burn my bokes when I was dead, and thought he
loked sourely on me. Dec. 1st, George my man, who had lyne
oute all night, this morning used me very dishonestly, and sayd
he owed me no servyce. Mr. Bettgran the justice was not at
home. Dec. 13th, Thunder in the afternone and at sonne-set.
Dec. 1th, the 15th day being cownted the 25, 50, 10 dayes ar
imagined spent, which have crept in betwene the day of Crist his
birth regarding the place of the sonne, and the sonnes place not
the 25th day of this month, whiche a civile æquation, but mathe-
matically and religiusly to be substantiated to be for the true term
of the periods of annuall revolutions of the sonne sinse the day of
Christ his birth.
	1583. Jan. 13th, on Sonday the stage at Paris Garden fell down
all at ones, being full of people beholding the bearbayting. Many
being killed thereby, more hart, and all amased. The godly ex-
pownd it as a due plage of God for the wickednes ther usid, and
the Sabath day so profanely spent. Jan. 19th, Mr. John Leo-
nard Haller went to London and so to go toward Scotland. Jan.
23rd, the Ryght Honorable Mr. Secretary Walsingham cam to my
howse, where by good lok he found Mr. Awdrian Gilbert, and so
talk was begonne of North-west Straights discovery. The Bishop
of St. Davyd’s (Mr. Middelton) cam to visit me with Mr. Thomas
Herbert. The Lord Grey cam to Mr. Secretary, and so they went
unto Greenwich(?). Jan. 24th, I, Mr. Awdrian Gilbert, and John
Davis went by appointment to Mr. Secretary to Mr. Beale his
howse, where onely we four were secret, and we made Mr. Secre-
tarie privie of the N.W. passage, and all charts and rutters were
agreed uppon in generall.
	Feb. 2nd, Rolandus Dee baptizatus. Feb. 3rd, Mr. Savile, Mr.
Powil the yonger, travaylors, Mr. Ottomeen his sonne, cam to be
acquaynted with me. Feb. 4th, Mr. Edmunds of the Privie
Chamber, Mr. Lee who had byn in Moschovia, cam to be acquaynted
with me. Feb. 11th, The Quene lying at Richemond went to Mr.
Secretary Walsingham to dynner ; she coming by my dore gra-

[page 19]

tiously called me to her, and so I went by her horse side as far as
where Mr. Hudson dwelt. Ερ μαιεστι αξεδ με οβοσκυρελι οφ μουνσιευρἱς
στατε : διξι βιοθανατος εριτ. Roland went with his nurse to her howse
to Estshene. Feb. 18th, the Lady Walsingham cam suddenly
into my howse very freely, and shortly after that she was gone
cam Sir Francys himself and Mr. Dyer. Feb. 24th, Jane churched.
Feb. 26th, I delivered my boke to the Lord Threasorer for the
correction of the Calender.*
 March 6th, I, and Mr. Adrian Gilbert and John Davis, did
mete with Mr. Alderman Barnes, Mr. Townson and Mr. Yong
and Mr. Hudson, abowt the N.W. voyage. March 16th, Mr. John
Davys went to Chelsey with Mr. Adrian Gilbert to Mr. Radforths,
and so the 18th day from thence toward Devonshyre. March
18th, Mr. North from Poland, after he had byn with the Quene he
cam to me. I receyved salutation from Alaski, Palatine in Poland ;
salutation by Mr. North who cam before to the Quene, and next
to me was his message, hor. 12. Nurse Lydgatt at Estshene

	* This work, although never entirely printed, created much sensation at the time,
and was the cause of considerable controversy among the politicians as well as literati.
The Memorial on this subject which Dee presented to the Privy Council has been
printed by Hearne and others, but it is not generally known that the original manu-
script of the actual treatise on the correction of the Calendar is still preserved in Ash-
mole’s library, No. 1789, and is the very book which Dee alludes to above. It is
inscribed “ to the Right Honorable and my singular good Lorde, the Lorde Burghley,
Lorde Threasorer of Englande,” with the following verses : —
                        “ To ὁτι and το διοτι,
                        I shew the thing and reason why ;
                        At large, in breif, in middle wise,
                        I humbly give a playne advise ;
                        For want of tyme, the tyme untrew
                        Yf I have myst, commaund anew
                        Your honor may. So shall you see
                        That love of truth doth govern me.”
	The work itself is entitled, “ A playne Discourse and humble Advise for our Gratious
Queene Elizabeth, her most Excellent Majestie to peruse and consider, as concerning
the needful Reformation of the Vulgar Kalender for the civile yeres and daies accompt-
ing, or verifyeng, according to the tyme truely spent.”

[page 20]

was payd for 5 pound candell, 6 pound sope, and the wagis due
from Rowland his birth. April 18th, The Quene went from Riche-
mond toward Grenwich, and at her going on horsbak, being new
up, she called for me by Mr. Rawly his putting her in mynde,
and she sayd “ quod defertur non aufertur,” and gave me her right
hand to kisse. April 14th, nurse was payd for Rowland all her
wagis tyll Monday the 22 of this month, 16 pence a weke : she
had all her candell and sope before.
	May 1st, Albertus Laski, Polonus, Palatinus Scradensis, venit
Londinum.* May 4th, Mr. Adrian Gilbert and Mr. Pepler went
by water to Braynford, and so to ride into Devonshire. May 7th,
E. K. went toward London, and so to go homeward for 10 or 12
dayes. Dies Quadragesimus a die Veneris ante Pascham. May
13th, I becam acquaynted with Albertus Laski at 7½ at night, in
the Erle of Lecester his chamber in the court at Greenwich.
This day was my lease of Devonshyre mynes sealed at Sir Leonell
Ducket’s hows. May 18th, the Prince Albertus Laski cam to me
at Mortlake, with onely two men. He cam at afternone and
tarryed supper, and after sone set. Nurse Rowland was payd all
tyll the 20th of this month. June 15th, abowt 5 of the clok cam
the Polonian Prince Lord Albert Lasky down from Bissham,
where he had lodged the night before, being returned from Oxford
whither he had gon of purpose to see the universityes, wher he
was very honorably used and enterteyned. He had in his com-
pany Lord Russell, Sir Philip Sydney, and other gentlemen : he
was rowed by the Quene’s men, he had the barge covered with
the Quene’s cloth, the Quene’s trumpeters, &c. He cam of purpose
to do me honor, for which God be praysed ! June 19th, the Lord
Albert Laski cam to me and lay at my hows all nyght. Nurse
Rowland payd her wagis ending the 17th day of this month.
	July 1st, Master Mills his answer of no hopes in my sute

	* “ The year of our Lorde God 1583, the laste daye of Aprill, the Duke or Prince
of Vascos in Polonia, came to London and was lodged Winchester Howse.” — MS.
Douce, 363, fol. 125. This account differs from Dee’s by a single day.

[page 21]

at Grenewich. July 7th, George was dismissed my servys and payd
all reconings in the presens of goodman Hilton and Mistres
Kelly in my study. July 10th, Thomas Hoke of Cranford cam
to my service, but he went away agayn the 23 day of this month.
July 30th, the Quene removed on Tuesday from Greenwich to
Sion by water ; coming by my dore . . . . . . . . . . July 31st, the
Quene’s gift of 40 angells* sent by the Erle of Lecester his
secretarie Mr. Lloyd, throwgh the Erle his speche to the Quene.
Mr. Rawlegh his letter unto me of hir Majesties good dis-
position unto me. Aug. 1st, John Halton minister dwelling in
London with . . . . . . . . . . bowed in and looked, and the
. . . . . . . . . a Wurcetershire man, a wicked spy cam to my
howse, whom I used as an honest man, and found nothing wrong
as I thought. I was sent to E. K. Aug. 7th, Mr. William Bur-
row passed by me. Aug. 14th, payd nurse Lydgatt for Rowland
for two monthes ending the 12th day. Aug. 18th, a great tempest
of wynde at mydnyght. Maxima era E. K. cum uxore ejus.
Sept. 21st, we went from Mortlake, and so the Lord Albert Lasky,
I, Mr. E. Kelly, our wives, my children and familie, we went
toward our two ships attending for us, seven or eight myle below
Gravessende.
	1586. July 10th, Mr. William Maynard natus hora 12 noctis,
vel paulo post, Londini. Sept. 14th, Trebonam venimus. Oct.
18th, E. K. recessit a Trebona versus Pragam curru delatus ;
mansit hic per tres hebdomadas. Nov. 8th, illustrissimus prin-
ceps versus Pragam ; iter institit hora tertia a meridie. Nov. 14th,
rescripsi ad Victorem Reinholdum. Nov. 19th, to the glas hows.
Nov. 21st, Michael was begone to be weaned. Nov. 22nd, recepi

	* “ Her Majestie being informed by the Right Honourable Earle of Leicester, that
whereas the same day in the morning he had told me that his Honour and Lord Laskey
would dine with me within two dayes after, I confessed sincerely unto him that I was
not able to prepare them a convenient dinner, unless I should presently sell some of my
plate or some of my pewter for it. Whereupon her Majestie sent unto me very royally
within one hour after forty angels of gold from Sion, whether her Majestie was now
come by water from Greenwich.” — Dr. Dee’s Compendious Memoriall, p. 511.

[page 22]

literas Jacobi Memschiti. Dec. 8th, Monday abowt none Mr.
Edward Garland cam to Trebona to mee from the Emperor of
Moschovia, according to the articles before sent unto me by
Thomas Hankinson. Dec. 11th, St. Poloniensis obiit : natus
anno 1530 die 13 Januarii, hora quarta mane min. 26, in Transyl-
vania. Obiit, hora secunda post mediam noctem, ut intellexi ex
literis Dni Lasky, receptis die 29 per Alexandrum. Dec. 19th,
19die (novi kalendarii) ad gratificandum Domino Edouardo Gar-
lando, et Francisco suo fratri, qui Edouardus nuncius mihi mis-
sus erat ab Imperatore Moschoviæ ut ad illum venirem, E. K. fecit
proleolem lapidis in proportione unius . . . . . . gravi arenæ super
quod vulgaris oz. et ½ et producta est optimi auri oz. fere : quod
aurum post distribuimus a crucibolo una dedimus Edouardo.
Dec. 30th, E. K. versus Pragam.
	1587. Jan. 8th, cam Nicolas du Haut, Frenchman of Lorrayn,
who had byn lackay to my frende Otho Henrick Duke of Bruns-
wik and Lienburgh, to seke a servyse, being dismissed by pass-
port from his Lord after his long sikenes. Jan. 14th, Doctor Rein-
holdt of Salfeldt cam to Trebona with Abraham. His sute of the
salt. Doctor Reinholdt revisit versus Pragam 20 die. Jan. 18th,
rediit E. K. a Praga. E. K. browght with him from the Lord Ro-
senberg to my wyfe a chayne and juell estemed at 300 duckettes ;
200 the juell stones, and 100 the gold. Jan. 21st, E. K. again to
Prage and so to Poland ward. Feb. 5th, I tok a jornay of myself
from Trebon to Newhowse, two myles of, to mete my Lord to
comen with him. I toke two horsemen of the cyty with me.
Feb. 9th, Illustriss.* venit a Vienna ad Trebonam. Feb. 12th,
ivit Illustriss. versus Crocoviam. Feb. 19th, E. K.† cam from
Poland abowt none to Trebone: I sent word to my Lord straight.
Feb. 21st, my Lord sending no word yet, I sent another message.
March 3rd, a Cremona ad Trebonam. March 7th, E. K. dedit

	* He frequently speaks of Prince Albert Leski under the title of Illustrissimus.
	† It is almost unnecessary to observe that these initials refer to Edward Kelly.

[page 23]

nobis 300 ducata. Recepimus a Domino Illustrissimo 3300.
March 9th, iter regium. March 14th, venimus Reichstein.
March 17th, reditus a Reichstein. March 21st, E. K. gave me
170 more, and of the 200 for changing 60 remayne. Contumelie
et contemptus a Cholek et a Schonberg. March 23rd, venimus
Trebonam. March 26th, the Lord Biberstein, comming from
Cranbaw from the Lord Rosenberg, passing by Trebona, sent for
me to his ynn to make acquayntance with me. E. K. equitavit
Crotoviam. April 4th, actio tertia incepit. April 18th, actionis
tertiæ finis. May 1st, vidi (doctore meo premonstrante) Michaelium
Nuncium non Mersaelem. Laus sit Deo et doctori meo E. K. !
June 14th, nuptiæ Domini Thomæ Kelei. June 17th, αφτερ θις φυλ
μονε ιανε ἁδ θεμ νοτ. June 22nd, Mr. Francis Garland went
toward England from Trebona.
 July 5th, Sonday, I set the two erthes with theyr water agayn
uppon them. July 9th, Mr. Francis Pucci cam and browght
Chrisan Franken with him, who, he sayd, had now recanted his
wycked boke against Christ, wherof I was glad. Illustrissimus
cum Domina venerat Trebona. July 11th, colloquium inter Illus-
trissimum Dominum, Dominum E. K. et me, a meridie, inter nos
tres. July 13th, Francys Pacci recessit. July 19th, a certayn
kinde of recommendation between our wives. Next day saw
relenting of E. K. also by my Lord’s entrety. July 20th, Illus-
trissimus abiit cum principissa sua versus Cremoniam. Aug.
13th, amice cum Domino Edouardo Keleo de tribus illis votis.
Aug. 17th, E. K. cum fratre et Ludovico . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 18th, we understode how E. K. went to Badwise to bed, and
went but this day at none from thence. Aug. 20th, John Basset
cam to Trebona. Aug. 23rd, Mr. E. K. cam from Lyntz fayre.
Sept. 1st, Tuesday morning, covenanted with John Basset to
teach the children the Latyn tong, and I do give him seven
duckats by the quarter, and the term to begyne this day ; and so
I gave him presently seven duckatts Hungary, in gold, before my
wife. God spede his work ! Sept. 3rd, 4th, continua quasi pluvia


[page 24]

per biduum istud. Sept. 4th, Basset his hurlyburly with Mr. T.
Kelly. Sept. 16th, the Lord Biberstein cam to Trebon, and
Cracht with him. Sept. 22nd, my Lord cum from Crummow to
Trebon with my Lady. Sept. 26th, my Lord went toward Prage.
Sept. 28th, I delivered to Mr. Ed. Kelley (ernestly requiring it as
his part) the half of all the animall which was made. It is to
weigh 20 ownces ; he wayed it himself in my chamber : he bowght
his waights purposely for it. My Lord had spoken to me before
for some, but Mr. Kelly had not spoken. Sept. 30th, T. K. and
J. C.* went toward Prage.
 Oct. 12th, Mr. E. K. toward Prage on horsbak. Oct. 13th,
mane paulo ante ortum solis observavi radio astronomico inter
. . . . . et . . . . . gradus 2 minuta prima 22, et erat . . . . .
sub Tauro in eadem linea perpendiculari ante oculum demissa super
horizonta altitudo erat vix quatuor graduum. Oct. 15th, hyred
Nicolas. Oct. 20th, I toke up the furniture for the action. Oct.
26th, Mr. Edward Kelly cam to Trebona from Prage.  Oct. 28th
and 29th, John Carp did begyn to make furnaces over the gate,
and he used of my rownd bricks, and for the yern pot was con-
tented now to use the lesser bricks, 60 to make a furnace. Oct.
31st, Ed. Hilton cam to Trebona in the morning. Nov. 8th, E. K.
terribilis expostulatio, accusatio, &c. hora tertia a meridie. Nov.
17th, John Basset had seven ducketts beforehand for his second
quarter’s wages, begynning the 1st. Nov. 21st, Saterday at night
Mr. Francis Garland cam from England to Trebona and browght
me a letter from Mr. Dyer and my brother Mr. Richard. Nov.
24th, at the marriag super Critzin the Grand Captayn disdayned
to com thither to supper in the Rad howse of Trebona becawse
E. K. and I were there ; and sayd farder that we wer . . . . . .
. . . . . .  Dec. 1st to 11th, my Lord lay at Trebon and my Lady
all this tyme. Dec. 10th, Mr. John Carpio went toward Prage to
marry the mayden he had trubbled ; for the Emperor’s Majestie,
by my Lord Rosenberg’s means, had so ordred the matter. Dec.

                  * That is, Thomas Kelley and John Carp.

[page 25]

12th, afternone somwhat, Mr. Ed. Keley his lamp overthrow, the
spirit of wyne long spent to nere, and the glas being not stayed
with buks abowt it, as it was wont to be ; and the same glas so
flitting on one side, the spirit was spilled out, and burnt all that
was on the table where it stode, lynnen and written bokes, — as
the bok of Zacharius with the Alkanor that I translated out of
French for som by spirituall could not ; Rowlaschy his thrid boke
of waters philosophicall ; the boke called Angelicum Opus, all in
pictures of the work from the beginning to the end ; the copy of
the man of Badwise Conclusions for the Transmution of metalls ;
and 40 leaves in 4°, intitled, Extractiones Dunstani, which he
himself extracted and noted out of Dunstan his boke, and the very
boke of Dunstan was but cast on the bed hard by from the table.
 1588. Jan. 1st, abowt nine of the clok afternone, Michel,
going chilyshly with a sharp stik of eight ynches long and a little
wax candell light on the top of it, did fall uppon the playn bords
in Marie’s chamber, and the sharp point of the stik entred throwgh
the lid of his left ey toward the corner next the nose, and so
persed throwgh, insomuch that great abundance of blud cam out
under the lid, in the very corner of the sayd eye ; the hole on the
owtside is not bygger then a pyn’s hed ; it was anoynted with St.
John’s oyle. The boy slept well. God spede the rest of the
cure ! The next day after it apperid that the first towch of
the stikes point was at the very myddle of the apple of the ey,
and so (by God’s mercy and favor) glanced to the place where it
entred ; with the strength of his hed and the fire of his fulness,
I may make some shew of it to the prayse of God for his mercies
and protection. Jan. 11th, Nicolas was sore hart circa 8½ hora
nocte. Jan. 13th, at dynner tyme Mr. Edward Kelly sent his
brother, Mr. Th. K. to me with these words, “ My brother sayth that
you study so much, and therfor, seeing it is to late to go to day to
Cromlaw, he wisheth you to come to pass the tyme with him at
play.” I went after dynner and playd, he and I against Mr. F.
Gore and Mr. Rob tyll supper tyme, in his dynyng rome : and

[page 26]

after supper he cam and the others, and we playd there two or
three howres, and frendely departed. This was then after the
great and wonderful unkindnes used toward me in taking my
man. Jan. 15th, Mr. Edward Kelly rid to Crumlow, being sent
for by my Lord. I receyved a letter from the Lord Chamberlain.
Jan. 18th, Mistres Lidda K. had an abortion of a girle of 5 or 6
monthes ; she was mery and well till the night before ; I helped
to finde the dead birthe within one howr after I had caused her to
have myrh given unto her in wyne warmed, the quarter of a ounce ;
better after she was discharged of the secondyne, and all at ones.
The woman was sufficiently strong after. Jan. 19th, Mr. E. K.
cam from Crumlow. Feb. 4th, Mr. Francys Garland and his
brother Robert went from Trebona to go toward England : I wrote
to Mr. Dyer and Mr. Yonge. Feb. 8th, Mr. E. K. at nine of the
clok afternone sent for me to his laboratory over the gate to se how
he distilled sericon, according as in tyme past and of late he hard
of me out of Riplay. God lend his hart to all charity and virtue !
Feb. 16th, John Carpe cam to Trebon after his marriage. Feb.
19th, Mr. E. K. did δισκλοσε σομ, ακκουντεδ μι φρενδες, ὁυυ υντρυ θει
υυερ. Feb. 28th, mane paulo ante ortum solis natus est Theodoras
Trebonianus Dee, ascendente Sirio in horoscopo, die dominica.
March 1st, baptisatus erat Theodoras Dee Trebonæ ante meri-
diem. March 6th, I went to Newhous and dyned at the castell.
March 1st, my Lord cam to Trebona and my Lady. March 24th,
Mr. K. put the glas in dung. March 26th, my Lord sent one of
his secretaries with answer to my letter, and with offer and pro-
mys of all where he can pleasure me, circa 5 post meridiem.
March 29th, my Lord and Lady from Trebon toward Crumlow.
The midwife’s husbond’s name of Newhowse is David Peregri-
nus, perhaps of the familie of Petrus Peregrinus, otherwise called
Peter of Maharncourt, of Picardy.
	April 3rd, Mr. Pucci disquietted Mr. E. K. abowt requesting an
action, to which he had one of our six monthes actions, being
now the term begynning the fourth day of this month. The
ende of our talke was a strange spech of Mr. Kelly to Fr.

[page 27]

Puccy. After 15 wekes write to me, and I will answer you.
April 6th, Edmond Hilton went from Trebona toward Prage with
Mr. John Carpe, and so toward England. April 10th, I writ to
Mr. Edward Kelly and to Mistres Kelly ij. charitable letters,
requiring at theyr hands mutual charity. I went to Mr. Captain
Chritzin, to know if he were offended to me, who in outward
shew used me reasonably curteously. April 12th, my wife
churched, and we receyved the communion. John Carpe browght
his wife from Prage to Trebona. April 17th, Doctor Reinholt
cam to Trebona. April 22nd, nocte hora 9 terribilis et falsa accu-
satio vel suspicio, quod Puccia annunciavit contra D. K. et ipsum
principia(?). May 1st, Mr. Carpio rid to my Lord to the holy well
at the glass hows, four myles from Trebona, with my letters of
purgation for Puccies his attempts or intents in his letters to my
bond and Mr. Kelly, unknown to me. May 24th, Mr. Carpio
browght me word of my Lord’s displeasure, conveyed and con-
firmed by cozen Pully his letters. Deus ille sit propitius ! May
7th, post afflictionem magnam meam, mei misertus est Deus !
Puccia, die eodem venerunt literæ Principis ad Dominum E. K.,
quæ dies declarabat amici sui infamum meum ne dignitatem : sed
non reddebatur nisi, valde præfex, valde erat ingratæ ille literæ ipsi
Domino E. K. Misericordia Dei magna ! Omne quod vivit lau-
det Deum ! Hæc est dies quam fecit Dominus ! May 10th, E. K.
did open the great secret to me, God be thanked ! May 19th, hora
10 cum circumstantiis necessariis. May 22nd, Mistris Kelly
received the sacrament, and to me and my wife gave her hand in
charity ; and we rushed not from her. May 30th, Michael was sik
of an ague, and Mr. Kelly likewise. June 4th, the howses burnt
at Trebon in the morning early on Whitsonday. June 8th, Illus-
trissimus venit Trebonam. June 11th, Illustrissimus recessit in
Dominica a Trebona versus Pragam. My Lord sent Critzin with
his compliments unto me, and to offer me help, hora prima a
meridie. A letter cam from T. G. of Mr. Dyer, his being three
myle from Trebona, but it was not so. Mr. Dier sent word by

[page 28]

Francis Garland wher. June 13th, cam Francis Garland and Mr.
Edmond Cooper, brother to Mistris Kelly, to Trebona. June
16th, Francis Garland went to fynde and bring Mr. Dier. June
19th, I had a grudging of the ague. June 22nd, I did evydently
receive the ague, and layd down.
	July 7th, Mr. Thomas Sowthwell cam to Trebona to visit us.
July 17th, Mr. Thomas Sowthwell of his own courteous nature
did labor with Mr. Edmond Cowper and indirectly with Mistres
Kelly for to furder charity and frendship among us. July 20th,
Mr. Dier cam to Trebona. July 22nd, a meridie circa 10 Mr.
Edward διερ διδ ινιυριε με υνκινδελε. July 23rd, reconciliatio bona
cum Magistro διερ υυιθ υυυρδς φακτο μεδιαντε E. K. Aug. 1st, Mr.
Harry Maynard natus nocte circa horam 11 Mortlak. Aug. 4th,
Illustrissimus cam from Crachovia to Trebon, and there on Friday
before dynner cam up Mr. Dyer, who lay in my chamber, and
entertayned him honorably. Aug. 5th, after dynner the little boy,
sonne to the Captayn of Rhaudnitz, hurt Arthur’s nose with a
raser, not in anger but by chance wantonly. Aug. 6th, my Lord
and Lady went toward Prage. Aug. 7th, this day I covenanted
and hyred John Hammond, jentleman, to serve me in his honest
servyces for one yere, and to have 30 dolers for his full and all
manner of wages. Aug. 9th, Tuesday, Mr. Dyer went from Trebon,
having in company Mr. Edmond Cowper, Francys Garland, and
his man Rowley. Aug. 13th, Mr. Thomas Sowthwell ryd to Prag
ward from Trebon. He told us of the philosopher (his schole-
master to write) whose name was Mr. Swyft, who gave him a
lump of the philosopher’s stone so big as his fist : a Jesuit named
Mr. Stale had it of him. Aug. 14th, Mr. Sowthwell cam againe.
Aug. 24th, vidi divinam aquam demonstratione magnifici domini
et amici mei incomparabilis D. Ed. Kelei ante meridiem tertia
hora. Aug. 27th, John Basset (so namyng himself) otherwise
truely named Edward Whitlok, under pretence of going to Bud-
weiss to buy cullors and so to return agayn, did convey himselfe
from my servyce of teaching Arthur grammer. Sept. 3rd, my

[page 29]

lord and lady cam to Trebon. Sept. 12th, spes confirmata. Sept.
15th, the Lord Chamberlain cam to Trebona, and went away on
the 17th. The rancor and dissimulation now evident to me, God
deliver me ! I was not sent for.
	Oct. 17th, Mystres Kelly and the rest rode toward Punchartz
in the morning. Oct. 18th, my Lord and my Lady ryd toward
Ctumnate. Oct. 25th, Mr. Ed. Kelley and John Carpio rode
toward Prage : this night to Wesely, two myles. Nov. 5th, I
dreamed that the toth next my top toth skarse cold hang in my
hed, the toth on the right side above. Nov. 6th, Mr. Kelly cam
home from Prage and Mr. Francys Garland, and Edward Rolls
with him from Eglis. Nov. 15th, in the fornone, snow and close
clowdy. Nov. 16th, the Lord and Lady Rosenberg cam from
Crummedo to Trebon in the evening. Nov. 20th, this Sonday
before dynner the Lord and Lady Rosenberg went from Trebon
toward Prage. Nov. 23rd, Mr. Francis Garland and Edward
Rowly, Mr. Dyer his servant, went from Trebon toward England.
I writ to the Quene’s Majestie, Mr. Dyer, Mr. Yong, and Edward
Hilton. Dec. 4th, I gave to Mr. Ed. Kelley my Glass, so highly
and long estemed of our Quene, and the Emperor Randolph the
second, de quo in præfatione Euclidis fit mentio.* The letter
of 500,000 ducats required. Dec. 7th, γρεατ φρενδκιπ προμισιδ φορ
μανι, ανδ τυυο ουνκες οφ θε θινγ. Dec. 13th, Mr. Edward Kelley

	* This refers to the earliest English translation of Euclid by Billingsley, which was
published in 1570, with a long preface by Dr. Dee. Professor De Morgan is of
opinion that the translation also was by Dee, or that Billingsley may have been only a
pupil who worked immediately under his directions. The passage to which Dee
alludes is as follows: — “ a man to be curstly affrayed of his owne shadow ; yea, so
much to feare, that if you, being alone nere a certaine glasse, and proffer, with dagger
or sword, to foyne at the glasse, you shall suddenly be moved to give backe (in maner)
by reason of an image appearing in the ayre betwene you and the glasse with like
hand, sword, or dagger, and with like quicknes, foyning at your very eye, likewise as
you do at the glasse. Straunge this is to heare of, but more mervailous to behold
then these my wordes cam signifie; and neverthelesse by demonstration opticall the
order and cause therof is certified; even so, as the effect is consequent.” I refer the
reader also to Mr. Barlow’s History of Optics in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana.

[page 30]

gave me the water, erth and all. Dec. 14th, Edmond Hilton
cam again to Trebon from England. Dec. 18th, I did understand
by Mr. Kelley that my glass which he had given to my Lord
Rosenberg, the Lord Rosenberg had given it to the Emperor.
Dec. 23rd, I went to the new made citie Kaiser Radnef Stadt, by
Budneis, to ovirsee what Joachim Reimer had done abowt my
coaches making. Radulphus Sagiensis Gallus Normannus, venit
Trebonam, chimiæ et naturalis magiæ studiosus.
	1589. Jan. 3rd, Rudolphus Sagiensis Normannus recessit versus
Pragam. Jan. 17th, the humming in my eares began. Jan. 19th,
circa undecimam noctis abortiebatur Domina Lydda uxor D.
Thomæ Kelly ex duobus masculis vix sex mensium, et anno pre-
cedente hoc ejusdem uxor abortiebatur puella. Jan. 20th, Mr.
Kelly showed me the Lord Rosenberg his letter ; when he wrot
that of me he hard no more of my going hens, and if Menschik
hath not performed as he willed him, that if I send him word he
will so dispatch me that therby I shall not nede to stay here, as
he had confidently heretofore warned Mr. Kelley, so now he did
request him to take leve of me at my departure. And then Mr.
Kelly did loke and truly confess that my . . . . Jan. 25th, Mr.
Mains cam to visit us ; the Erle of Schwiczenbagh thre sones.
Jan. 31st, Tuesday, I sent Edmond Hilton to Prage, and Zacha-
rias Mathias of Buelweiss, to buy 10 or 12 coach horses and sad-
dell horses for 300 dollers. Feb. 4th, I delivered to Mr. Kelley
the powder, the bokes, the glas and the bone, for the Lord Ro-
senberg ; and he thereuppon gave me dischardg in writing of his
own hand subscribed and sealed. Feb. 12th, Edmond Hilton
cam from Prage with nine Hungarian horses bowght toward our
jornay. Feb. 16th, Mr. Edward Kelley rode toward Prage after
none, John Carpio, Edmond Hilton, Henry Garlande, Thomas
Simkinson, Lodovik. March 11th, from Trebon in Bohemia.
March 18th, to Nuremberg. March 20th, from Nuremberg.
March 26th, to Frankfurt on the Mane.
	April 19th, to Breme. May 1st, Katharin by a blow on the

[page 31]

eare given by her mother did bled at the nose very much, which
did stay for an howre and more ; afterward she did walk into the
town with nurse ; upon her coming home she bled agayn.
May 11th, John of Gloles cam to Breme. May 13th, I cam to
lie at my hyred hows. May 17th, the three saddle horse put to grass to
the town meddowes for nine ducets tyll Mychelmas.
May 21st, the Landgrave of Hesse his letters to me and the city
of Breme. May 25th, I sent the Lantgrave my twelve Hunga-
rish horses.  June 2rd and 13th, Mr. Duerend and Mr. Hart
went toward Stade. They had scaped from the Spanish servise
in Flanders with Syr William Stanley. June 6th, Dr. Kenrich
Khanradt of Hamburgh visitted me. Mr. Thomas Kelly his
wife, Francis Garland, Rolls, from Standen toward England.
June 16th, Edmund Hilton toward Prage. June 19th, Hans of
Glotz went toward Standen, and so toward England. June 23rd,
Mr. Daniel van der Multon cam to me. Ultima die mensis istius
circa meridiem maximi imbres, tonitrua, grandines.
	July 7th, Thursday the 26th of June (by the old accownt and the
6th of July by new accownt) Mr. Hart, the minister of the English
company, and Mr. . . . . . . the governor’s deputy of the English
company at Stade, did visit me at my howse in Breme. July 18th,
Mr. Yong and Mr. Secretary his letter. July 30th, Edmond Hil-
ton cam from Prage to Breme by Stade. Aug. 2nd, veteri stilo,
the nyght following, my terrible dream that Mr. Kelly wold by
force bereave me of my bokes, toward daybreak. Aug. 5th, novo
stylo, Edmond Hilton went toward Stade, to go toward England,
with my letters to disclose the treason of Perkins. Ther went in
this company two English people, Mr. Rolous Tattin and George
Losin. Aug. 7th, the first of the seven half fasts. Aug. 14th,
Theodor wened. Aug. 21st, John Hammond to Stade. Aug. 22nd,
natus William Hazilwood mane hora sexta fere, forte hora 5 min.
45, by Maydston in Kent. Sept. 9th, Roger his serviceable let-
ters of the Lord Rosenberg. Sept. 12th, the wynde cam East
after five wekes most part West. Sept. 16th, ante meridiem hora

[page 32]

9 in delinquiciis A. C. incidi ex ingratitudine concepta ex verbis
uxoris, et Anallæ Mariæ. Sept. 22nd, stilo veteri, I delivered to
Mr. Jacob for England by Embden my letters.
	Oct. 3rd, D. Witischindi his hard dealings with me : he bad
Mr. Harper the Secretary to give me warning of my howse.
Oct.9th, warned out of my howse hora prima a meridie. Oct.
14th, John Hanward gave me warning that he desyred to go tra-
vayle toward Italy ; but first to Master Kelly of whome he hoped
to have good help. Oct. 17th, Mr. Sowthwell and Mr. Gawyne
Smyth cam to me to Bream. Oct. 23rd, Mr. Sowthwell and Mr.
Smyth went from Bream. Oct.29th, Wenefrida Goose inter 9
et 10 a meridie. Oct. 31st, letters sent to Stade for Gerwein Gre-
ven for her Majestie, Mr. Yong, and Mr. Dyer. Nov. 1st, newes
of Mr. Dyer sent ambassador to Denmarke. Nov. 13th, stilo ve-
teri, I resolved to go into England, hoping to mete Mr. Edward
Kelly at Stade, going also into England ; and that I suspected uppon
Mr. Secretary Walsingham his letters. Nov. 13th, Edmond Hil-
ton and his brother from England, and John a Glotz. Nov. 17th,
die lunæ, I met Mr. Dyer comming to Stade, even in the myddle of
the town. Nov. 18th, Edmond to Stade ward. Nov. 19th, toke
ship by the Vineyard. Dec. 2nd, we cam into the Tems to Graves-
ende. Dec. 3rd, from the ship to Stratford to Mr. Yong’s howse.
Dec. 19th, at Richemond with the Queene’s Majestie.* Dec. 20th,
agreed for my howse with Nicolas Fromonds to occupy as a tenant
with better order. Dec. 25th, I lay this night first at my howse.
Dec. 29th, Mr. Adrian Gilbert cam to me to Mortlak, and offred
me as much as I could require at his hands, both for my goods car-
ryed away, and for the mynes.
	1590. Jan. 15th, a terrible tempest of wind, South by West.
Jan. 23rd, Mr. Thomas Kelly cam from Brainford ; put me in
good hope of Sir Edward Kelly his returning : offered me the
loane of ten pownds in gold, and afterward sent it me in Hun-

	* Where, according to Aubrey, who received his information from Lilly, he was
very favourably received by her Majesty.

[page 33]

gary new ducketes by John Croker, the same evening. Jan. 26th,
I writt to Mr. Adrian Gilbert two letters. I resolved of the order
to be offred for agreement with Nicholas Fromonds for my howse
and goodes. The 5th of March (by old accownt) was Madinia
Newton, my daughter, christened at Mortlak ; godfather, Sir
George Cary ; godmothers, the Lady Cobham and the Lady
Walsingham. March 12th, Mrs. Anne Deny born betweene 8 and 9
afternoone. March 14th, Mr. Dyer cam home from Stade. March
17th, Sir Edward Kelly his letter by Francis Garland. March
21st, Sir George Gary cam to Mortlak. March 27th, Jane appre-
hended hora quinta a meridie.* My children at this Lady Day in
Lent, began to go to schole at Mortlak with the scholemaster Mr.
Lee : I gave him his howse-rent and forty shillings yerely for my
three sons and my doughter. The howse-rent was allmost 4s.
yerely of Mr. Fisher his new howse. April 7th, John Spenser
cam to me, from Venys new returned, and told me of the Venetian
philosopher and the goodnes of his gold. April 16th, good Sir
Francis Walsingham died at night hora undecima. April 19th, I
delivered my letters to Mr. Thomas Kelley for his brother Sir Ed-
ward Kelley, knight, at the Emperor’s court at Prage. Francys
Garland was by, and Mr. Thomas Kelley his wife. God send them
well thither and hither agayn ! Mr. Emery had disbursed to me
frankly betwene the tyme from Shrovetyde tyll this May £25.
May 5th, Mr. Thomas Jack restored unto me part of my magnes
stone. May 8th, I received 20 mark from Sir Richard Lagney, of
Longlernay. May 16th, I gave Mr. Lee the scholemaster 5s. in
part of wages. May 18th, the two gentlemen, the unckle Mr.
Richard Candish, and his nephew the most famous Mr. Thomas

	* There are a great many brief notices in this diary relative to Jane Dee, most of
which are expressed in astrological symbols ; and as they are exceedingly difficult to
decipher satisfactorily, and are certainly of very little, if any importance, I have
thought it expedient to omit them. The entry of “ Ιανε ἁδ θεμ ” is also of frequent
occurrence, though what “ θεμ ” can refer to I have not been able to discover.

[page 34]

Candish,* who had sayled rownd abowt the world, did viset me
at Mortlake. May 20th, ater dynner, I with my brother, Mr.
Justice Yong, went to the Archebishop of Canterbury to Lambeth,
abowt the personagis who used me well. May 21st, I showed my
indignation against Bacchus feast at Braynferd intended ; gave the
Bishop of London warning, who toke it in very good part. Ka-
tharyne, my dowghter, was put to Mistres Brayce at Braynferd, hir
mother and Arthur went with her after dynner. May 23rd, I
lent to goodman Dalton, the carpenter, xxs. for a month. May
29th, 30th, bona nova de industria Domini Richardi Candishii,
cum Regina et Archiepiscopo et Domino Georgio Carey, de pro-
positione Etonensis Collegii obtinendi legem. He sent me a hogs-
hed of claret wyne as a gyft. The Lady Cobham sent my wyfe
suger and pepper, &c. June 2nd, I writ to Syr Edward Kelly by
Mr. William Fowler, merchant, dwelling by Ledenhall. June 3rd,
I was very sik uppon two or thre sage leaves eten in the morning ;
better suddenly at night ; when I cast them up, I was well. The
pump taken out and the well skoured. June 5th, Thomas Han-
kinson and Antony my man cam from beyond the seas to Mort-
lak. Terrible yll newes of Edward Kelly against me.
June 24th, £20 of Mr. Candish by Edward Hilton. June 28th,
I payd Mr. Hudson for all his corn, and also for the wood tyll
May, receyved synce I cam home.
	July 6th, Mr. Stockden was all payd for his wood 40s. I gave
the scholemaster Mr. Lee 5s. in part of wagis : he browght me
my hammer from Mr. Jak, so he hath a quarter’s wagis 10s. July
8th, I receyved Sir Edward Kelly his letters, dated at Prage the 24th
of May stylo novo. No mention is made of his brother Mr. Thomas
Kelly coming over. July 10th, the executor of the Lady Ducket
requered the det. July 11th, I payd nurse Barwik 12s. for ii.
monthis wagis for Madinia : so she is payd for five monthes.

	* Dee has preserved several interesting notices of his intimacies with the principal
navigators of his time. A general reference to Hackluyt will be sufficient.

[page 35]

July 13th, I went to the Archbishop of Canterbury : talked with
him boldly of my right to the personages, and to the treatise of
Sir Edward Kelley his Alchimy. July 14th, Mr. Gawayn Smyth
spake frendely for me to the Quene, and she disclosed her favor
toward me. July 16th, jmy mynde was somewhat bent to deale
with my alchimicall exercises. July 25th, I writ a letter of thanks
to the Lord Threasorer by Edmond Hilton. I sent the Lord
Chancellor his letters from Brunswyk, of Conrad Nettlebronner
his ill behaviour. July 31st, I gave Mr. Richard Candish the
copy of Paracelsus twelve lettres, written in French with my own
hand ; and he promised me, before my wife, never to disclose to
any that he hath it ; and that yf he dye before me he will restore it
agayn to me ; but if I dy befor him, that he shall deliver it to one
of my sonnes, most fit among them to have it. Theoddor had a
sore fall on his mowth at mid-day. Aug. 2nd, Mrs. Stoner’s
sonne born circa horam tertiam a meridie. Nurs her great afflic-
tion of mynde. Aug. 5th, Rowland fell into the Tems over hed
and eares abowt noone or somewhat after. Aug. 8th, I gave Nurse
Barwick six shillings, so she is payd for the half yere due on
Weynsday next. Aug. 9th, I payd to Mr. Lee the scholemaster 5s.
Aug. 22nd, Ann my nurse had long byn tempted by a wycked
spirit : but this day it was evident how she was possessed of him.
God is, hath byn, and shall be her protector and deliverer ! Amen.
Aug. 25th, Anne Frank was sorowfol, well comforted and stayed
in God’s mercyes acknowledging. Aug. 26th, at night I anoynted
(in the name of Jesus) Ann Frank her brest with the holy oyle.
Aug. 30th, in the morning she required to be anoynted, and I did
very devowtly prepare myself, and pray for vertue and powr and
Christ his blessing of the oyle to the expulsion of the wycked ;
and then twyse anoynted, the wycked one did resest a while.
Sept. 1st, I receyved letters from Sir Edward Kelley by Francis
Garland. Sept. 8th, Nurse Anne Frank wold have drowned hir-
self in my well, but by divine Providence I cam to take her up
befor she was overcome of the water. Sept. 23rd, Sonday, I gave

[page 36]

Nurse Barwyk six shillings for a monthis wages to ende on
Wensday comme a fortnight ; Mrs. Stackden was by. Sept. 29th,
Nurse Anne Frank most miserably did cut her owne throte, after-
none abowt four of the clok, pretending to be in prayer before
her keeper, and suddenly and very quickly rising from prayer, and
going toward her chamber, as the mayden her keper thowght, but
indede straight way down the stayrs into the hall of the other
howse, behinde the doore, did that horrible act ; and the mayden
who wayted on her at the stayr-fote followed, her, and missed to
fynde her in three or fowr places, tyll at length she hard her
rattle in her owne blud.
	Oct. 11th, Mr. Cumber cam to me. Oct. 14th, payd Nurse
Barwik six shillings for one month ending on the seventh, being
Wensday. Oct. 15th, this afternoone and all the night following
a great storme of wynde at North-West. One Prychard that had
marryed Proctor Lewes his widdow, demaunded £24 of me uppon
an obligation of £64 : whereof by the very note on the bak of the
same £48 is payd, so that £16 only remayne and not £24, as he
unduely demanded : which £16 I challenged for the costes of his
sonne John, three yeres and longer being with me in Mortlak,
and having also his lerning free. Notwithstanding my wife afraid
payd a pownd or two to Mr. Lewys of that £16, and yet Prichard
will go to law. Nov. 12th, the Archbishop of Canterbury gave
me £5 in ryalls and angels circa horam decimam matutina.
Nov. 20th, Her Majestie cam to Richemond. Nov. 27th, the
Quene’s Majestie, being at Richemont, graciously sent for me.
I cam to her at three quarters of the clok afternone, and she sayd
she wold send me something to kepe Christmas with. Nov. 28th,
Mr. Candish on Saterday gave my wife forty shillings, and on
Tuesday after sent £10 in ryalls and angels, and before he sent
me £20, £32 in all. My cousin Mr. Thomas Junes cam in the
ende of the terme about St. Andrew’s even. Dec. 1st, Her Ma-
jestie commaunded Mr. John Herbert, Master of Requests, to
write to the Commissioners in my behalf. Dec. 2nd, order taken

[page 37]

by the Commissioners for my howse and goods. Her Majesty
told Mr. Candish that she wold send me an hundred angels to
kepe my Christmas withall. Dec. 3rd, goodwife Tyndale payd
for Antony his lodging for eleven wekes dew at his going away
5s. 6d., and before she had for seven wekes. Dec. 4th, the
Quene’s Majestie called for me at my dore circa 3½ a meridie as
she passed by, and I met her at Estshene gate, where she gra-
ciously, putting down her mask, did say with mery chere, “ I
thank thee, Dee ; there was never promisse made but it was
broken or kept.” I understode her Majesty to mean of the
hundred angels she promised to have sent me this day, as she yester-
night told Mr. Richard Candish. Dec. 6th, Mr. Thomas Griffith
my cosen from Llanbeder cam to see me, and lay all night with
me, and allso Mr. Thomas Jones, and in the Monday morning
went by water to London, and so the same day homeward. A
meridie circa 3ª recepi a Regina Domina £50. Dec. 8th, at Chel-
sey disputing with Doctor Mather, bishop of Bristow ; in danger
of water hora 5½ I stayed at Chelsey. Dec. 14th, the Quene’s Ma-
jestie called for me at my dore as she rod by to take ayre, and I
met her at Estshene gate. Dec. 16th, Mr. Candish receyved from
the Quene’s Majestie warrant by word of mowth to assure me to
do what I wold in philosophie and alchimie, and none shold chek,
controll, or molest me ; and she sayd that she wold ere long send
me £50 more to make up the hundred pound. I gave Mr.
Candish the Bishop of Scotland his conclusion with marchaunts.
Mr. Candish went from Mortlak at four of clok at nyght toward
London and so into Suffolk. Dec. 18th, Mr. Robert Maynard
natus circa horam decimam antei meridiem Londini.
	1591. Jan. 21st, utterly put owt of hope for recovering the two
parsonages* by the Lord Archbishop and the Lord Threasorer.
Feb. 13th, Bartilmew cam up. March 2th, borrowed £20 uppon

	* See the “ Compendious Rehearsall,” published by Hearne from a Manuscript in
the Cottonian collection, now partially destroyed by fire, for a more extended account
of this.

[page 38]

plate and payd this day £19 in Mortlak. March 21st, remember
that on Passion Sunday, being the 21st of March by our accownt,
all things was payd for to Mr. Thomas Hudson for wood and
corne, abowt £14, at his howse when he was syk of the strangury.
Allso to godman Bedell was payd £4 for billet, baven, and lose
fagot the same day. Payd likewise to gudwife Wesder eight shil-
lings for one monthes nursing of Madinia, and 4s. more before-
hande. March 26th, Mr. Beale sent me home the first my own
hand copy of the volume of Famous and Rich Discoveries * which
I had given anno 1583 to Andrew Strange.
	May 12th, I payd goodwife Welder xijs. for vij. wekes ending
then next from the Wensday before Ester-day last. May 25th,
of the old Kalander, Sir Thomas Jones Knight (unaxed) offred
me his castell of Emlyn in Wales to dwell in so long as he had
any interest in it, whose lease dureth yet twelve yeres, freely,
with commodityes adjoining unto it ; and allso to have as much
mow land for rent, as myght pleasure me sufficiently. The 27th
day he confirmed the same his offer agayn before Mr. John Har-
bert, Master of the Requestes, in his hall in Mortlak ; which his
offers I did accept of, and he was glad thereof. May 31st, Bar-
tilmew [Hickman] cam up and browght Jane his dowghter with
him. Mr. R. Ed. his boke and letter. June 8th, William Asp-
land of Essex and Th. Collen. June 12th, lent Chronica Hol-
landiæ Magna to Mr. Beale on Saterday manuscript, which Mr.
Webb lent me. June 14th, Jane Hikman to goodwife Tyndall’s
to lern. June 27th, Arthur wownded on his hed by his own wan-
ton throwing of a brik-bat upright, and not well avoyding the fall
of it agayn, at Mr. Harberts abowt sonn-setting. The half-brik
weighed 2½ lb. June 30th, Madinia was taken home from goodwife
Welder.
	July 28th, Mr. Dyer sent me xx. angels by Mr. Thomas Webbes.
July 30th, reconciliation betweene Mr. Dyer and me solemnized

	* Now in the Cottonian collection. Ashmole has preserved a copy of it in MS.
Ashm. 1790.

[page 39]

the afternone on Friday, and on Saterday (the 31st) all day tyll
my going by boat at Mr. Webb’s lodging at Rochester Howse.
July 31st, by old Kalender, abowt an eleven of the clok Jane was
at London very faynt syke, redy to swownd, and in a faynt swete.
It was thowght that then she quickened. The last of Julie,
Saterday by the old accownt, Barthelmew cam up ; he went down
on Tuesday, the 3rd day of August, from Mortlak. Aug. 2nd,
Monday, Mr. William Diggs his philosophicall curtesy all day.
Sept. 22nd, Madinia fell from the bed and hurt her forhed abowt
one of the clok afternone. Oct. 15th, after midnight very wyndy
northerly. Oct. 23rd, a storm of wynde S.W. afternone. Dec.
3rd, wyndie S.W. Dec. 14th, I had a very jentle answer at the
Lord Thresorer’s hand hora decima ante meridiem at the court of
Whitehall. Dec. 20th, a jentle answer of the Lord Threasorer
that the Quene wold have me have something at this promotion
of bishops at hand.
	1592. Jan. 1st, my dowghter Francys borne on New Yeres day
at the sun-rising exactly. Jan. 2nd, Barthilmew and his brother
Ambrose cam this Sonday to Mortlak. Jan. 9th, Francys
christened afternone. Francys went with her nurse to Barne
Elms. Mr. Edward Maynard borne in the morning betwene 2
and 3 after mydnight. Arthur fell into a quotidian jentle ague at
9 of the clok in the morning as he was at the servyce in the hall.
Jan. 24th, Mr. Thomas Oliver becam acquaynted with me at
Mortlak. March 6th, the Quene granted my sute to Dr. Awbrey.
March 9th, the pryvy seale at night. March 16th, the great seale.
March 18th, Arthur and Katharine were let blud at London by
Doctor Dodding’s cownsayle. March 24th, £25 Mr. Tho. Mown-
son. March 25th, I payd £10 to Nicholas Fromonds paulo ante
solis occasum, when he most abhominably revyled me. March
30th, on Thursday Mr. Saunders of Ewell sent home my great
sea cumpas, but without a nedle ; it cam in the night by water.
	April 5th, the Lady Russell robbed a little after mydnight of
perles, diamands, &c. One John Smyth is suspected, a yong man

[page 40]

of thirty yeres old, very ingenious in many handyworkes, melan-
cholek. April 8th, Richard cam to my servyce, 40s. yerely and a
livery. April 9th, 10th, agreed with my brother Nicholas Fromonds
with Mr. Webbs, at 8 of the clok on Wensday night, and 8 on
Tuesday night. April 14th, Winifrede Goose, wife of goodman
Goose of Tuddington, dowghter of Harry Wyse, eviley tempted,
cam to me with her sister. April 16th, δε θεσαυρο α βοκ. April
27th, filius Mariæ Nevell hora 3½ a meridie et aliquantus tardus
by Chichester. May 3rd, Wensday, at 10 of the clok Arthur was
put to Westmynster Schole under Mr. Grant and Mr. Camden.
May 11th, I borowed ten pound of Master Thomas Smith to be
paid at Christmas next. May 12th, great wynde at north. May
15th, Marian cam again a meridie hora septima. May 16th, I rode
to Harfelde to the Lord Anderson, Lord Justice of the Common
Pleas, 12 myles off. May 25th, hora sexta a meridie mowght
have byn a quarell betwene Mr. Web and Mr. Morgan with one
eye for £4. left unpayd uppon a bill. June 16th, Sir John Perrot
judged to be drawn, hanged, and quartered.
	July 23rd, at Grenwich abowt mydnight following this day
began the first evydent shew of my grief of kidneys ; whereuppon
Doctor Giffard caused me to have a glyster, and so the next day
I was easid of my grief. July 29th, Robert Theneth of Rushmer
by Ypswych made acquaintance with me : he told me of Mr.
Carter a man of 80 yeres old in Yorkshyre. Aug. 6th, I went to
Nonsuch to the court, wyder the Countess of Warwik sent me
word by Mr. Ferdinando of the Quene’s gratious speches at St.
Crosses, and the Lord Archbishop told me the like. Aug. 8th,
after the midnight of Monday, being the 7th day, the second fytt
of the stone in my kydnes did molest me for 6 or 7 howres. Aug.
9th, the Lord Threasorer invited me to dynner at Mr. Maynards
at Mortlak, where Sir Robert Cecill and Sir Thomas Cisell and
his lady wer allso. The Lord Threasorer allso sent me some
venison to supper. He invited me to dynner allso the tenth day,
where the Lord Cobham cam also to dynner, and after dynner he

[page 41]

requested the Lord Threasorer to help me to St. Crosses, which
he promised to do his best in. Aug. 11th, Mr. Kemp of Micheam,
my old acquayntance, abowt an eleven of clok (allmost) before
none, told me of the rare appearing. Aug. 17th, I went to Micheam
to Mr. Kemp. Aug. 21st, I went to the Lord Cobham and the
Lady Cobham to London. Aug. 23rd, Mr. Cholmely and his
mayde ante meridiem hor. 11½. The humor so suddenly falling
into the calf of my left leg as if a stone had hit me. Aug. 26th,
Mr. Heriot 40s.* Auditor Hill, £4. Remember all thing is payd
to our nurse at Barnes for the girle Francys Dee from hir birth
untyll the ende of her eight month, lacking 12s., and on Sunday,
the 27th of this August, we so concluded, when we gave the nurse
ten shillings. The eight month ended (from Newyere’s day
morning last) the 12th of this month. Sept. 4th, 5th, 6th, very
tempestuous, windy at West, Sowtherly. Sept. 5th, the Tems
very shallow at London. Sept. 6th, goodman Warryn of Market-
Harborogh. Robert Web cam from Mr. Ponsoys to write, and
is to com agayn within thre wekes. Sept. 7th, Robert Charles of
Northamptonchyre and goodman Warren of Marketharborow in
my howse at Mortlak promised me to help Barthilmew Hikman
with £12 to pay on Michelmas Day next to discharge the bond
for his brother-in-law. This they promised uppon condition I
wold be bownd to them to see them repayd agayn. I sent a letter
to Sir Robert Thaneth to Rushmer by Ypswych by the wagon-
man who is at ynn at the George in Lombard Streete. He sayd
that Robert Thaneth was at home and well. Sept. 19th, I had
on the Sunday abowt 7 of the clok afternone the cramp most ex-
tremely in the very centre of the calves of both my legs, and in
the place where I had the suddeyn grief on Bartilmew-even last I
had payn so intollerable as yf the vaynes or artheries wold have
broken by extreme stretching, or how els I cannot tell. The payn

	* This entry is not very clear. It either refers perhaps to Harriot, the celebrated
mathematician, or to the London goldsmith whom the Abbotsford novelist has
immortalized.

[page 42]

lasted abowt half a quarter of an howr. I toke my purgation of
six grayns. I began in the morning to drink the drink for the
stone in the kydney. Sept. 28th, Mr. Laiesley promised me ten
shepe and four quarters of wheat. Sept. 30th, Elizabeth Denby
went from me to Mistres Herberts’ to servyce.
	Oct. 13th, I exhibited to the Archbishop of Canterbury two
bokes of blasphemie against Christ and the Holy Ghoste, desyring
him to cause them to be confuted : one was Christian Franken,
printed anno 1585 in Poland; the other was of one Sombius
against one Carolius, printed at Ingolstad anno 1582 in octavo.
Oct. 14th, 15th, a mighty wynde at sowth-west. Oct. 30th, 31st,
one of these two dayes I hurt my left shyn against the sharp small
end of a wooden rammar abowt four of the clok afternone. Nov.
1st, Mr. Ashly, his wife, and their familie, did com to my howse
and remayned ther. They had my mother’s chamber, the mayde’s
chamber, and all the other howse. Nov. 9th, Her Majestie’s
grant of my supplication for commissioners to comme to me. The
Lady Warwik obteyned it. Nov. 22nd, the commissioners from
Her Majestie, Mr. Secretary Wolly and Sir Thomas George, cam
to Mortlak to my howse. Nov. 28th, to Richard Walkdyne of his
wagis 20s. Dec. 1st, a little after none the very vertuous Cowntess
of Warwik sent me word very speedily by hir gentleman Mr.
Jones from the cowrt at Hampton Cowrt that this day Her Majestie
had granted to send me spedily an hundred marks, and that Sir
Thomas George had very honorably dealt for me in the cause.
Dec. 2nd, Sir Thomas George browght me a hundred marks from
her Majestie. Dec. 24th to 31st, at Mr. Lurensey of Tooting all
these days, and Newyere’s Day allso, and so cam home by coach
(as we went) by Tuesday none, I, my wyfe, Arthur, Kate, &c.
Dec. 31st, at Tooting at Mr. R. Luresey his howse ; abowt thre of
the clok after dynner dyd the Bishop of Laigham serve process
uppon me for the nangle, but most unduely.
	1593. January, the Lord Threasorer lay dangerously syk in the
begynning of this month. Jan. 2nd, I cam home from Tooting.

[page 43]

Jan. 7th, I receyved letters from the Lord Lasky from his capi-
taynate in Livonia, and I wrote answer agayn. Jan. 10th, this
day death seased on him. This day at none dyed Edward May-
nard just on yere old. Jan. 11th, buried this day at ten of the
clok. Jan. 15th, Mr. Ashley, the clerk of the cownsayle, his wife
and whole family removed from my howse in Mortlak to theyr
hows in London in Holborn, with all his whole family. He and
she had used me, my wife and childern, wurshipfully and
bowntifully for our frendeship shewed unto them for the lone of our
howse and lodgings from Allhallow-tyde last. Master Maynard
allso his howsehold removed the 15th and 16th day to London,
and my stable free delivered. Jan. 20th, I sent my letters for the
Lord Lasky to be carryed in a shyp of Dansk called the John of
Dansk. Jan. 21st, Sonday, about none Wenefryde Goose her sone
born and died, and she did [there]uppon for old melancholik pangs
destroy herself. Memorandum, my nurse at Barnes had xvjs.
more besides the last 40s. in the begynning of this month. Feb.
14th, Francys Dee, she cam from the nurse at Barnes ; the woman
very unquiet and unthankfull. Feb. 15th, Her Majestie gratiously
accepted of my few lynes of thankfulnes delivered unto her by the
Cowntess of Warwik hora secunda a meridie at Hampton Court,
two or three dayes before the remove to Somerset Howse. Feb.
21st, I borrowed £10 of Mr. Thomas Digges* for one hole
yere. Feb. 22nd, a sharp anger betwene me and the Bishop of
Leightyn in the towr, for that he wold not shew his farder interest
to Nangle : he sayd that after I had seen his brode seal of commen-
dation, that I had institution and induction to the Nangle. Then I
sayd his lordship did fable. He there uppon that so moved that
he called me spitefully “ coniver.” I told him that he did lye in
so saying, and that I wold try on the fleysh of him, or by a bas-
taned gown of him, if he wer not prisoner in the Towr. Inter

	* This notice is particularly interesting, showing the intimate connexion which
existed between the first English mathematician of the day and the philosopher of
Mortlake.

[page 44]

12ª et 2ª a meridie my sharp anger with the Bishop of Leightyn
in the lieftenante’s dyning parlor before the Lieutenant Sir Michael
Blunt. Mr. Liewtenat Nant and Mr. Blunt are wittnesses. March
12th and 13th, these two nights I dremed much of Mr. Kelly, as
if he wer in my howse familiar with his wife and brother. March
17th, Francis Garland cam home and browght me a letter from
Mr. Thomas Kelly. I made acquayntance with Syr Thomas
Chaloner, Knight, who married sergeant Fletewood’s dowghter ; Mr.
Thomas Webbes was the meanes. At six after none receyved
from Mr. Francis Nicholls £15, part of one hundred pounds, the
rest whereof £85 is to be receyved from Mr. Nicolls within a
fortnight after the Annunciation of Our Lady next ; and after that in
the beginning of June £100, and in Julie the third hundred
powndes : and I am to teach him the conclusion of fixing and
teyning the moon, &c.
	April 3rd, Bartilmew Hikman and Robert Charles cam up.
Letice cam with Barthilmew, and went away agayn. April 8th,
Letice cam agayn from Barnet to my servyse. I receyved £50
of Mr. Nichols. April 9th, I gave Barthilmew Hikman £12 in
new angels to give and pay to Robert Charles, which he had payd
for him at Michelmas last. I gave him allso a double pistolet for
his courtesy. Little Adolph Webbes cam to me. April 10th,
Barthilmew and Robert Charles went homward. May 7th,
Thomas Richardson of Bissham cam to Mortlak to me. May 9th,
he and Mr. Laward of the Chandry cam. Our court day at
Wymbledon. May 11th, mane hora octava William Emery of
Danbery in Essex became my retayner at Mortlak, commended
by Mr. Thanet of Rushmer by Ypswich, borne 1568, Julii 4. I
gave Robert Web 10s. Richard 10s. and Elizabeth 3s. in the
begynning of this month. May 21st, be it remembered that on
this xxj. day of May I bargayned with and bowght of Mr. Mark
Perpoint, of Mortlak, that next mansion howse with the plat, and
all the appertenances abowt it for £32, as the sayd Mr. Perpoint
of late had at the last court-day bowght it, and had surrender of it

[page 45]

unto him made of Thomas Knaresborowgh for £25 to mydsom-
mer next. Abowt two of the clok after none, before Jane my
wife in the strete, I gave him a saffron noble in ernest for a drink
peny. Mr. Hawkins, of London, at that instant cam to have
bowght it. May 27th, Mr. Francys Blunt, brother to the late
Lord Mountjoy, unkle to the Lord Mowntjoy living, and to Sir
Charles of the court, cam to be acquaynted to me, he having byn
a travayle at Constantinople. June 4th, Barthilmew Hikman
cam to Mortlak in the morning. June 22nd, I had my copy of
Mr. Roger Dale our stuard, and had £5 the fine released of the
Lord his bowntifullnes. I told the stuard that I had bowght the
howse of Mr. Mark Perpoynt, and he desyred to see the note of
his copy, and so I did. I told Mr. Perpoint that I had byn at
London to prepare his mony, and I told him that I had seen the
court-roll for his copy. I went to London to fetch the £32 for
Mr. Perpoint, and so I sent him word. This evening I browght
the mony, but he was gon to bed. This morning I tendered the
mony, and told it at goodman Welder’s before Mr. Stokden, and
goodman Welder, but Mr. Perpoint refused to perform the bar-
gayn. Deus bene vertat !
	July 13th, I gave to Robert 5s. upon his wagis this day. July
14th, I gave 4s. to Letise, part of her noble for her quarter wagis,
ending the 9th day of this month. July 18th, I bowght goodman
Welder his hovel, which is in the yard of the howse next me, which
I bowght of Mr. Mark Perpoint. I gave him a new angel and
five new shillings, and he is to have more 5s., that is 20s. in all ;
and if I cannot compact to enter the howse, then hee is to tak his
hovel, and to restore it to me. July 21st, I gave to Richard 5s.
uppon his wagis this day. July 22nd, I payd Mr. Childe
£7. 13s. 4d. for all his wood, xx. lode and vj. July 24th, the offer
for the bargayn agayn of Mr. Perpoynt’s behalf : this is Mr. Stok-
den’s doing. July 27th, remember that this Friday I payd Mr.
Tomson £4 for his master Mr. Herbert, which I borrowed 12th
of December 1592 : and Mr. Herbert sent it agayn to my furder

[page 46]

use by Mistres Lee. Aug. 7th, Mystres Twyne and Mystres
Banister cam to viset me. Mr. Bele and Mrs. Bele, Mistres Plan,
Mrs. Parpoint, &c. dyned with me. I gave Robert Web 5s. ; he
sent it to Mr. Homes. Aug. 9th, I dyned with the Lord Keper at
Kew. Aug. 17th, I and my wife and Katharin our dowghter
dyned with the Lord Keper at Kew. Aug. 28th, I was all day
with the Lord Keper. Mr. Web and the philosopher cam. Aug.
29th, Mr. Web and the philosopher cam again. Aug. 30th, Mis-
tres Redhed, mother to Mr. John Ponsoys by her first husbond,
Mr. Gubbens, bokebynder, and his wife, and the same day Mr.
Redhed himself, one of her Majestie’s jentlemen hushers, cam to
me. Sept. 11th, Jana, post triduunam ægrotationem abortiebatur,
mane hora decima. Sept. 13th, the howse surrendered for me by
Mr. Mark Perpoint, Mr. William Walker of Wimbledon, Miles
Holland, Mr. John Stockden, the thre customarie tenants, with
promys to bring in his wife at the next court day to surrender.
Sept. 18th, Elizabeth Kyrton had 2s. 6d. Sept. 20th, Barthilmew
Hikman cam to Mortlak, and Robert Charles. I gave Robert
Web 5s. by Arthur. Sept. 26th, Mr. Herbert went toward the
court, and so toward Waty. Sept. 28th, tempestuous, windy,
clowdy, hayl and rayn, after three of the clok after none.
Remember that the last day of this month Elizabeth Kyrton, who
had served me twelve yeres, five yeres uppon prentiship and
seven for wagis, five yeres therof for four nobles a yere,
and the two last for five nobles the yere, was payd her full
payment now remayning due : whereuppon she receyved £4. 4s.
for her due of wagis remayning ; and I gave her moreover an half
angel new in gold, and my wife another ; Arthur half-a-crown for
him and his brother ; Katharyn half-a-crown for her and her sister.
And so she wente from my servyce uppon no due cause known
to me.
	Oct. 4th, Sir Edward Keley set at liberty by the Emperor.
Oct. 12th, Mr. Cornelio Camaiere cam from the Lord Lasky from
Livonia. Oct. 15th, Margerie Thornton cam to my servyce.
Oct. 18th, before Mr. Perpoint, Miles Holland, Robert Wellder,

[page 47]

William Beck surrendred my cottage agayn unto me, and I payd
him £5, the full £12 as it cost him. To Letice two shillings.
Oct. 20th, Mr. Cornelio went toward the flete of Stade to returne.
Oct. 24th, Ostende besieged by report. Not true. Oct. 25th,
Mr. Gray, the Lady Cumberland’s preacher, his wrangling and
denying and despising alchimicall philosophers. Nov. 5th, Mr.
Francys Nicolls, Mr. Prise, Mr. Nores. Nov. 18th, Jane most
desperately angry in respect of her maydes. Nov. 20th, Margery
went and Dorothe Legg cam for 30s. yerely. Margery Thornton
was dismissed from my servyce to Mrs. Child, and Dorothe Leg
cam by Mrs Mary Revel’s sending the same day and howr, hora
tertia after none. Nov. 26th, John, sometymes Mr. Colman’s
servant, cam to me from the Lady Cowntess of Cumberland.
Dec. 3rd, the Lord Willowghby his bowntifull promys to me.
The Cowntess of Kent, his syster, and the Cowntess of Cumber-
land visited me in the afternone. The Lord Willowghby dyned
with me. Dec. 4th, £20 Lord Willughby. Dec. 5th, the newes
of Sir Edward Kelly his libertie. Dec. 11th, I gave Robert
20s. at his going to London with my wife. Dec. 22nd, I gave Robert
two shillings. Dec. 24th, Mr. Webbes committed to the Marshal-
sea. Dec. 25th, this night Mr. Webbes got out, and taken this
day (the 26th).
	1594. Jan. 3rd, the Lord Keper sent my wife 20 angels in a
new red velvet purse, cira occasum solis paulo ante. Jan. 4th,
D. Michael Peiserus, Doctor Medicus Marchionis Brandeburgen-
sis, me humanissime invisit. Jan. 5th, a very tempestuous wyndy
night. Jan. 9th, Robert Thickpeny from Sir Richard Martyn,
and Miles Holland, baylif for the Lord of the Manor, sealed up
Mr. Webb’s chest, and case of boxes. Jan. 19th, the cobler with
the mad woman. Jan. 25th, I sent my letters to Mr. Lording for
Mr. Pontoys to Dantsiz. Jan. 26th, I cam to Mr. Web to the
Marshalsea. Jan. 27th, Thomas Richardson cam while I was at
London, and so I fownd him at home ; and agayn he promised
me his working of forty dayes. Jan. 28th, Mr. Vander Laen

[page 48]

promised on 26 day to begyn his work of fixing lunam. Madinia
somwhat sickly. Robert Wood, visitted with spirituall creatures,
had comfort by conference. Jan. 31st, Mr. Vander Laen began
his work of luna, five myle sowth from Glocester. Mr. Morgan
Treherne told me of Mr. Lawrence of eighty yeres old. Mr.
Thomas Sharp, chief stuard to the Lady Russell at Bisham, is
master and good frende to Thomas Richardson, as he himselfe
told me. Theodore Dee from the myddle of this month had his
left ey blud-shotten from the side next his temple, very sore
bludshotten, above thre wekes contynuing. Feb. 1st, Mr. John
Ask sent me two little dubble gilt bowles waying thirteen ownces
and a half. Feb. 7th, Sir Thomas Wilks offer philosophicall cam
to my hands by Mr. Morice Kiffyn. This day the Archbishop
of Canterbury inclined sometyme to the request of dispensation.
Feb. 20th, 21st, Theodor fell sick in the Shrovtyde weke, and so
into a tertian ague. March 10th, uppon a flight of feare bycause
of Mr. Webbes his sending for me to come to him to the Mar-
shalsea, now when he looked to be condemned on the Monday or
Tuesday next. March 16th, Barthilmew Hikman cam up. March
18th, Mr. Heriot cam to me. March 20th, I did before Barthil-
mew Hikman pay Letice her full yere’s wagis ending the 7th day
of Aprill next ; her wagis being four nobles, an apron, a payr of
hose and shoes. March 23rd, I gave Barthilmew Hikman the
nag which the Lord Keper had given me. Barthilmew Hikman
and William his brother went homward. Magus disclosed by
frendeship of Mr. Richard Alred. Α συδδεν πανγ οφ ανγερ βετυυενε
Μ. Νικολς ανδ με. March 28th, Mr. Francis Garland browght me
Sir Edward Kelley and his brother’s letters. March 31st, a great
fit of the stone in my left kydney : all day I could do but three or
four drops of water, but I drunk a draught of white wyne and
salet oyle, and after that, crabs’ eys in powder with the bone in
the carp’s head, and abowt four of the clok I did eat tosted cake
buttered, and with suger and nutmeg on it, and drunk two great
draughts of ale with it ; and I voyded within an howr much water,

[page 49]

and a stone as big as an Alexander seed. God be thanked ! Five
shillings to Robert Webb, part of his wagis.
	April 1st, Capitayn Hendor made acquayntance with me, and
shewed me a part of his pollicy against the Spanishe King his in-
tended mischief agaynst her Majestie and this realme. April 4th,
John Stokden cam to study with our children. Mr. Thomas Wye
cam with a token from Mistres Ashley. Remove to Mr. Harding
and Mr. Abbot at Oxford abowt my Arabik boke. April 5th, my
right ey very sore and bludshotten. April 7th, Mr. Nicols cam
agayn out of Northampton. Mr. Barret and Mistres Barret cam
to visit me. May 3rd, betwene 6 and 7 after none the Quene
sent for me to her in the privy garden at Grenwich, when I deli-
vered in writing the hevenly admonition, and Her Majestie tok it
thankfully. Onely the Lady Warwyk and Sir Robert Cecill his
Lady wer in the garden with Her Majestie. May 18th, Her Ma-
jestie sent me agayn the copy of the letter of G. K. with thanks
by the Lady Warwick. May 21st, Sir John Wolley moved my
sute to Her Majesty. She graunted after a sort, but referred all
to the Lord of Canterbury. May 25th, Dr. Awbrey moved my sute
to Her Majesty, and answere as before. May 29th, with the Arch-
bishop before the Quene cam to her house. June 3rd, I, my wife,
and seven children, before the Quene at Thisellworth. My wife
kissed her hand. I exhibited my request for the Archbishop to
com to my cottage. June 6th, supped with the Lord Archbishop.
Invited him to my cottage. June 11th, given to Robert Webb at
London seven shillings in the begynning of this month. June
15th, £40 of Mr. Thomas Harward. I shuld have £60 more. A
great fytt of the stone in my kydneys. June 20th, Mistres Mag-
dalen Perpoynt was sole examined of our Stuard at the Temple.
June 22nd, morgaged my late purchas to Mr. Richard White for
£30, to be received within a few dayes. June 23rd, I discharged
Robert Web of my service, and gave him 40 shillings for a full
satisfaction of all things. Thomas Richardson cam and offered me
his work and labor, and had, as he requested, my letter to Mr.

[page 50]

Thomas Sharpe. June 24th, on Midsommer Day Antony Ryve
Taylor cam to my service, for wagis by the yere three pounds and
a livery. Barthilmew Hikman cam. June 26th, I discharged
Jane Hikman to go with her father Barthilmew home into North-
amptonshire, and gave her ten shillings, and promised her at Hal-
lowtyd ten shillings more. Barthilmew Hikman and Goodman
Ball with Jane Hikman went homward. June 29th, after I had
hard the Archbishop his answers and discourses, and that after he
had byn the last Sonday at Tybald’s with the Quene and Lord
Threasorer, I take myself confounded for all suing or hoping for
anything that was. And so adiew to the court and courting tyll
God direct me otherwise ! The Archbishop gave me a payre of
sufferings to drinke. God be my help as he is my refuge ! Amen.
	July 1st, I gave Robert yet more a French crown for a farwell.
July 2nd, given to Richard ten shillings uppon his wagis. July
6th, Michael becam distempered in his hed and bak. July 9th,
in the morning began my hed to ake and be hevy more then of
late, and had some wambling in my stomach. I had broken my
fast with sugar sopps, &c. I gave Letice my servant 5s. part of
her wagis : with part whereof she was to buy a smok and
neckercher. July 13th, in ortu solis Michael Dee did give up the ghost
after he sayd, “ O Lord, have mercy uppon me!” July 19th,
goodman Richardson began his work. Aug. 19th, Elizabeth
Felde cam to my servyce : she is to have five nobles the yere
and a smok. Aug. 26th, Mr. Gherardt, the chirurgion and herbalist,
[cam to me]. Aug. 30th, Monsieur Walter Mallet toke his leave
of me to go home to Tholose. He had the fix oyle of saltpetre.
Sept. 18th, I sent letters to Sir Ed. K. and T. Kelly, between 10
and 2 after none taken from the dore.
	Oct. 3rd, I payd Mrs. Stockden £4 I borrowed of her ; I payd
her 26s. 8d. for four loade of wood. I remayn debter for a load
of hay, and for 400 of billet in forks. Oct. 4th, payd Mr. Childe
£3. 10s. for ten lode of lose faggot. Oct. 14th, Mr. Robert
Thomas cam to my howse to dwell. Oct. 28th, hora 6½ a me-

[page 51]

ridie, I writ and sent a letter to the Lady Skydmor, in my wife’s
name, to move her Majestie that eyther I might declare my case
to the body of the cownsayle, or else under the great seale to
have lycens to go freely anywhither. Oct. 31st, lightening with-
out thunder in the afternone and in the night following.
	Nov. 24th, receyved a letter from Sir Edward Kelley by Row-
ley. Dec. 2nd, Francys Garland cam to England from Prage.
Just five yeres past I cam to England from Breame as Francis
Garland cam now : but the Stade flete stayed at Harwich. The
2nd of our cold December, Barthilmew was preferred by me to the
Lord Willoughby his servyce at Barbican, in the presence of the
Cowntess of Kent : and the Lord Willoughby did presently write
his warrant to Mr. Jonson in Fletestreet, taylor, to deliver to
Barthilmew his cloth and couishins, and so it was to Barthilmew
delivered immediately. Dec. 7th, Jane my wife delivered her
supplication to the Quene’s Majestie, as she passed out of the
privy garden at Somerset Howse to go to diner to the Savoy to
Syr Thomas Henedge. The Lord Admirall toke it of the Quene.
Her Majestie toke the bill agayn and kept [it] uppon her cushen ;
and on the 8th day, by the chief motion of the Lord Admirall, and
somwhat of the Lord Buckhurst, the Quene’s wish was to the
Lord Archbishop presently that I shuld have Dr. Day his place
in Powles. Dec. 22nd, payd seven shillings to Elizabeth Felde,
part of her wagis. Given to Lettyce 5s., part of her wagis. Payd
to Richard 8s., part of his wagis ; and all other reckonings payd.
	1595. Jan. 8rd, The Wardenship of Manchester spoken of by
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Feb. 5th, my bill of Man-
chester offered to the Quene afore dynner by Sir John Wolly to
signe, but she deferred it. Feb. 10th, at two after none I toke a
cutpurse taking my purse out of my pocket in the Temple. Feb.
18th, Mr. Laward his sonne Thomas born at noone or a little
after, ¼ vel ½. Consultatio et deliberatio prima cum Marmione
Haselwood in fine istius mensis. March 18th, Mr. Francis Gar-
land cam this morning to viset me, and had much talk with me

[page 52]

of Sir E. K. March 20th, Mr. Marmion Haselwood, Mr. Dym-
mock, and Mr. Hipwell, cam to me to Mortlak. Bar-
thilmew Hikman cam to Mortlak. March 26th, Barthilmew
homeward. March 29th, Mr. Laward and Mr. Alred cam to me.
	April 18th, my bill for Manchester Wardenship signed by the
Quene, Mr. Herbert offring it her. May 4th, payd Richard 20s.
part of his wagis, and more I gave him 10s. for full payment of
all od reckenings of late. May 5th, Mr. Cave dyed. May 8th,
the Master of the Rolls his curtesy, thowgh I had never spoken
unto him. May 9th, my coosen John Awbry cam to me, to re-
create himselfe for a while. May 21st, I discharged Letice of my
servyce, and payd all duetyes untyll this day, her yere ending on
the 8th of Aprill. I gave her for a month over 2s. 6d. and for
to spend by the way I gave her 2s. 6d., Robert Charles and my
wife being by in my study. May 25th, 26th, 27th, the Signet, the
Privy Seale, and the Great Seale of the Wardenship ; £3. 12s. bor-
rowed of my brother Arnold. June 1st, my yong coosen, John
Awbrey, was sent for to his father to London. Mr. Partrich, his
brother, in London ; Richard Ward, and other cam for him. June
9th, Barthilmew Hikman went homeward. June 11th, I wrote to
the Erle of Derby, his secretary, abowt Manchester. June
18th, Anne Powell cam to my service ; she is to have four nobles by
the yere, a payr of hose and shoes. June 21st, the Erle of Derby
his letter to Mr. Warren for the colledge. June 25th, Dr. Aw-
brey died at midnight. My cosen, Mr. George Broke, gave me
£50 in gold, hora tertia a meridie. June 29th, Mr. John Blayney,
of Over Kingesham in Radnorshyre, and Mr. Richard Baldwyn,
of Duddlebury in Shropshyre, visited me at Mortlak. The
great-grandfather of the sayd John, and my great-grandmother by the
father side, were brother and sister.
	July 1st, the two brethren, Master Willemots, of Oxfordshire,
cam to talk of my howse hyring. Master Baynton cam with Mis-
tres Katharyn Hazelwood, wife to Mr. Fuller. July 7th, Mr.
Morgan Jones, my cosen, cam to me at Mistres Walls twise.

[page 53]

July 12th, Mr. Goodier, of Manchester, cam to me. Dies nata-
lis. July 15th, I gave Mr. Morgan Traharn his bill to Mr.
Harbert. July 25th, Mrs. Mary Nevell cam. July 28th, a letter from
Mr. Oliver Carter, Fellow of Manchester College. I writt agayn
to him the same day. July 29th, Mistres Mary Nevel went to
London, and so into Kent. July 31st, the Cowntess of Warwik
did this evening thank her Majestie in my name, and for me, for
her gift of the Wardenship of Manchester. She toke it grati-
ously ; and was sorry that it was so far from hens, but that some
better thing neer hand shall be fownd for me ; and, if opportunitie
of tyme wold serve, her Majestie wold speak with me herself. I
had a bill made by Mr. Wood, one of the clerks of the signet, for
the first frutes given me by her Majestie. Aug. 2nd, at Mr. Cosener
his table at Grenewich : I spak that wich greatly liked Mr. Ser-
geant Oliver Lloyd ; wold have disputed agayn. Aug. 5th, very
rayny all day, and had the wynde north E. and W. Aug. 12th,
I receyved Sir Edward Kellyes letters of the Emperor’s, inviting
me to his servyce again. Aug. 14th, peperit Jana (nutu Dei) circa
horam quartam a meridie. Aug. 27th, Margarite Dee baptized
hora 4½ a meridie. Godfather, the Lord Keper ; his deputy, Mr.
Crowne. Godmothers, the Cowntess of Cumberland, her deputy
Mistres Davis ; and the Cowntess of Essex, her deputy Mistres
Bele. Barthilmew Hikman cam to Mortlak on his own busines.
Sept. 2nd, the spider at ten of the clok at night suddenly on my
desk, and suddenly gon ; a most rare one in bygnes and length of
feet. I was in a great study at my desk. Sept. 6th, I gave Richard
2s. 6d. part of his wagis, when he went to his grandfather. Sept.
13th, I dyned with the Erle of Derby at Russell Howse,
Mr. Thymothew and Mr. John Statfeldt, German, being there.
Sept. 14th, to Elizabeth Feeld 2s. for the taylor. Sept. 22nd,
Elizabeth Feeld went from my servyce. I dined with the Erle
of Darby. Sept. 26th, £6 borrowed of my cosen William He-
therley for fourteen days to pay for Barthilmew Hikman. Sept.
29th, Margery Stubble of Hownslow, our dry nurse, entred into

[page 54]

the yere of her servyce begynning on Michaelmas Day, and is to
have £3 her yeres wagis and a gown cloth of russet. Edward
Edwards began his yere of serving me allso on Michelmas Day,
and he must have 40s. for his yere’s wagis, and a lyvery.
	Oct. 7th, my anger (hor. 5 a mer.) with Edward my coke,
bycause of his disorder. Oct. 8th, Mr. Richard Western lent me
£10 for a yere. Oct. 9th, I dyned with Syr Walter Rawlegh at
Durham Howse. Oct. 11th, to Edward 2s., part of wagis. Mr.
Banks lent me uppon lone tyll after Christmas £5. Mr.
Emery sent me £3 by my servant Richard Walkedine. Oct. 14th,
to Anne 2s. part of wagis ; to Elizabeth Felde payd the rest of
her yeres wagis, and moreover 2s. 6d. given for the overplus tyme.
Oct. 19th, the old reckoning betwene me and Edmond Hilton
made clere. Of his eleven pownds demanded, I shewd him of
my old note that he had receyved £6. 15s., and after that Sted his
25s., and Mr. Emery his £3 lent him ; as I did shew him Sted
his letter, and Mr. Emery his letter of the last month. All these
sommes make just an eleven pownd. Payd to nurse Stubble, in
part of payment of her wagis, 5s. Oct. 20th, to Anne 12d.
Richard rode toward Oxford for my Arabik boke. Oct. 25th,
Sted was a suter to me for help in law against his father. Nov.
8th, my goods sent me by Peravall toward Manchester. Nov.
19th, my Arabik boke restored by God’s favor. Nov. 21st, good-
wife Lidgatt payd her rent two quarters ending at the feast of the
Annunciation of our Lady next, 13s. 4d. Goodman Agar was
by in my hall at Mortlak. Nov. 25th, the newes that Sir Edward
Kelley was slayne. Nov. 26th, Mr. Nicolas Bagwell of Manches-
ter browght me a letter from my brother Arnold. Lent to Mis-
ter Laurence Dutton twelve shillings. My wife and children all
by water toward Coventry. Dec. 10th, Mr. Lok his Arabik bokes
and letter to me by Mr. Berran his sonne. Dec. 23rd, I payd to
John Norton, stationer, ten pownds in hand, and was bownd in a
recognisance before Doctor Hone for the payment of the rest,
£10 yerely, at Christmas and Midsommer £5, tyll £53 more

[page 55]

14s. 8d. were payd. Receyved £30 in part of payment of one
hundred for my howse at Manchester of Mr. Paget. Dec. 26th,
nata filia Comitis Derby mane circa quartam horam Londini.
	1596. Feb. 15th, I cam to Manchester a meridie hora quinta.
Feb. 20th, enstalled in Manchester wardenship inter nonam et
undecimam horam ante meridiem. March 14th, warning given
publikely against Thomas Goodyer. March 21st, warning given
publikly of licence given to Thomas Goodyer.
	April 2nd, Sir John Byron, knight, and Mr. John Byron, es-
quier, dyned with me in the colledg. I moved the matter of Xyd
an aker of hay grownd of his tenants. He promised well. April
6th, I went to Mr. Ashton of Lester and to Mr. Sherington.
April 8th, Margaret Dee begonne to be weaned. May 7th, pos-
session taking in Salford. May 11th, my brother Aubrey and
Richard toward London. June 3rd, I gave Antony Cowly 20s.
and discharged him. June 4th, Antony Cowley went yerely from
my howse, I know not whither. June 14th, Mr. Harry Savill,
the antiquary, cam to me. June 15th, I wrote by Mr. Harry
Savill of the book dwelling at Hallyfax to Christopher Saxton at
Denningley. I sent my letter to Sir Robert Cecill’s howse by
William Debdell. June 18th, the commission for the colledge
sent to London to be engrossed in the Duchy office. I sent by
Nicholas Baguely of Newton to Mr. Brogreton and to William
Nicolson to follow it this terme. June 21st, Mr. Christopher Sax-
ton cam to me. June 22nd, entred upon great Brereridings in Sal-
ford. June 24th, Barthilmew cam. June 25th, order taken by the
sherif betwene me and Raf Holden. June 26th, the Erle of Derby
with the Lady Gerard, Sir . . . . Molyneux and his Lady,
dawghter to the Lady Gerard, Master Hawghton and others, cam
suddenly uppon me after three of the clok. I made them a
skoler’s collation, and it was taken in good part. I browght his
honor and the ladyes to Ardwyk Grene toward Lyme, at Mr.
Legh his howse, twelve myles of. June 29th, wyndy and rayny.

[page 56]

	July 5th, Mr. Savill and Mr. Saxton cam. July 6th, I, Mr.
Saxton and Arthur Rouland, John and Richard, to Howgh Hall.
July 9th, I sent Roger Kay of Manchester with my letters into
Wales. July 10th, Manchester town described and measured by
Mr. Christopher Saxton. Given to nurse Stubley 10s., part of
wagis. July 10th to 14th, occupyed with low controversies, as
with Holden of Salford and the tenants of Sir John Byron of
Faylsworth in the right of the colledge, sending to . . . . . to the
cownty, and sending for Mr. Tyldesley or Chester for cownsaylers.
July 12th, given more to nurse, when her sonne John Stubley
went from me toward London to be reconcyled to his master. I
gave him 5s. The yong man, Leon the hatter, went with him.
July 14th, Mr. Saxton rode away. The sessions day at
Manchester. July 19th, Ales cam by Mrs. Beston’s help to my ser-
vyce. Thomas, my coke, went from me. July 21st, Isabell
Bardman from the chamber to the kitchin. July 25th, thunder in
the morning ; rayne in the night. July 27th, the Erle of Darby
went by London ward ; dyned at Curtes’ howse. Aug. 10th, Mr.
Thomas Jones of Tregarron cam to me to Manchester and rode
toward Wales bak agayn the 13th day to mete the catall coming.
Aug. 13th, I rid toward York. Halifax and Mr. Thomas Jones
rode toward Wales. Aug. 20th, I cam to Manchester from York.
Aug. 20th to 27th, much disquietnes and controversy abowt the
tythe corne of Hulme. Aug. 30th, Cromsall corne-tyth obteyned
by consent, but afterwards dowted and half denyed ; then utterly
denyed. Sept. 1st, Mary Goodwyn cam to my servyce to govern
and teach Madinia and Margaret, my yong dowghters. Sept. 3rd,
being Fryday, I rode to Syr John Byron’s, to Royton, to talk with
him abowt the controversy betwene the colledg and his tenants.
He pretented that we have part of Faylesworth Common within
our Newton Heath, which cannot be proved I am sure. We wer
agreed that James Traves (being his bayly) and Francis Nutthall,
his servant for him, shold with me understand all circumstances,

[page 57]

and so duely to procede. Sept. 5th, seventeen hed of cattell from
my kinsfolk in Wales by the curteous Griffith David, nephew to
Mr. Thomas Griffith, browght.
	Oct. 26th, Mr. Francis Nicols and Barthilmew cam to Man-
chester. Oct. 29th, they rode homeward. Nov. 22nd, £4. 6s.
given to my wife by Mr. Francys Wodcote. Dec. 3rd, Mr. Palmer
cam to be curate.
	1597. Jan. 19th, I sent £4 to Barthilmew Hikman by Brad-
shaw the carryer. Jan. 22nd, Olyver Carter’s thret to sue me
with proces from London was this Satterday in the church declared
to the clerk. Feb. 5th, Rich. Key of Weram cwrate cam to me by
Mr. Heton’s information, and I to try him three monthes for 50s.
wagis. Feb. 7th, John Morryce came to Manchester. Feb. 11th,
£5 borowed of Mr. Mat. Heton. Feb. 14th, this Monday John
Morrise went with my letters to Mr. John Gwyn, and twelve more
in Montgomeryshyre, esquyers. Feb. 17th, delivered to Charles
Legh the elder my silver tankard with the cover, all dubble gilt,
of the Cowntess of Herford’s gift to Francis her goddoughter,
waying 22 oz. great waight, to lay in pawn in his owne name to
Robert Welsham the goldsmith for £4 tyll within two dayes after
May-day next. My dowghter Katharin and John Crocker and I
myself (John Dee) were at the delivery of it and waying of it in
my chamber : it was wrapped in a new handkercher cloth. Feb.
25th, Mr. Heton borrowed the Concordantiæ Majores Roberti
Stephani. He hath allso my boke De Cœna of Doctor Pezelia.
March 7th, Mr. Heton lent me £5 more, and thereuppon I gave
him a bill of my hand for the whole ten pownd, to be payd at
Michelmas next. The other £5 was receyved the 11th of
February last. March 17th, Barthilmew Hikman cam. March 19th,
I lent Mr. Hopwood Wierus de præstigiis Dæmonum.
	April 10th, a supplication exhibited by the parishioners. April
11th, 12th, trubblesom days abowt Mr. Palmer the curate. April
15th, I had my Wierus de præstigiis Dæmonum from Mr. Hopwood,
and lent him Flagellum Dæmonum and Fustio Dæmonum in 8vo,

[page 58]

for tyme till Midsomer. April 21st, I sent Barthilmew Hikman 40s.
I sent by Bradshaw many letters to London. I sent by goodman
Thurp of Salford my great letter to the byshop of Lincolne, and
one to Mr. Shallcross. April 22nd, after none Sir Urien Legh
knight, and his brother, and Mr. Brown, and Mr. George Booth,
sherif of Chesshire, did viset me. Mr. Booth sayd that he wold
yeld that to me that he wold not yeld to the bisshop nor any
other. Mr. Wortley of Wortley cam allso the same day hora
quarta a meridie. May 2nd, Mr. Hulme and Mr. Williamson cam
to me in the Lord Bishop of Lincoln’s case for Hulme. May 4th,
I, with Sir Robert Barber, curat, and Robert Talsley, clerk of
Manchester parish church, with diverse of the town of divers ages,
went in perambulation to the bownds of Manchester parish : be-
gan at the Leeless Bench against Prestwich parish, and so had
a vew of the thre corne staks, and then down tyll Mr. Standysh
new enclosure on the Low, wher we stayed and vewed the stak yet
standing in the bank of the dich, being from the corne a eleven
measures of Mr. Standley’s stak then in his hand, and two fote
more, which still I did measure afterward, and it did conteyn in
Kentish feete 6 ynches and thre quarters. The survey geometri-
call of the very circuits of Manchester parish was ended in this,
being the sixth day of my work. May 11th, the way to Stopford
surveyed by John Cholmeley and John Crocker. May 17th, to
Richard Walkeden 20s. of his wagis payd. May 20th, the Lady
Booth made acquayntance here May 23rd, to Isabell Boordman
8s. 8d. to make up whole yere’s wagis due at the Annunciation of
our Lady last past. I allowed to Mr. Williamson ten dayes
respite more for his kinsman to bring in his evidence for the
process of the proceedings. Payd to nurse 3s. to make up her full
payment of her yere’s wagis ended at Michaelmas last. May 27th,
open enmitie with Palmer before Sir Edward Fitton. Sir Edward
Fitton told Matthew Palmer to his face that he had known him
to be a mutinous man and a . . . . . . June 9th, Thomas Sankinson
told me of John Basset his coming to London. June 14th, the un-

[page 59]

lawfull assembly and rowte of William Cutcheth, Captayn Brad-
ley, John Taylor, Rafe Taylor, at Newton, against my men, de-
scribing the rumour of Newton. June 27th, newes from Hull of
23 barrells of Dansk rye sent me from John Pontoys.
 July 1st, I sent Roger Kay to Vanydles for catall. July 4th,
the carriers to Wakefeld for the corn. July 5th, toward evening
lightning and little thunder. July 6th, thunder in the morning.
July 7th, five horse lode of Dansk ry cam home. July 19th, the
strang pang of my back opening mane hora 6¼. In the church
uppon Mr. Palmer’s disorder against Mr. Lawrence. July 20th,
the last of my Dansk rye, in all 21 horse load. Aug. 6th, this
night I had the vision and shew of many bokes in my dreame,
and among the rest was one great volume thik in large quarto,
new printed, on the first page whereof as a title in great letters
was printed “ Notus in Judæa Deus.” Many other bokes me-
thowght I saw new printed, of very strange arguments. I
lent Mr. Edward Hopwood of Hopwood my Malleus Malefica-
rum to use tyll new yere’s tyde next, a short thik old boke with
two clasps, printed anno 1517. Aug. 19th, the Erle and Cowntess
of Derby cam to Alport lodg. Aug. 21st, the Erle and Cowntess
of Derby had a banket at my lodging at the colledge hora 4½.
Aug. 27th, John Addenstall from Mr. Emery. I wrote. Sept. 3rd,
Mr. Werall of Lobester within two miles of Donkaster cam to me
to be acquaynted with me. Sept. 9th, very wyndy at Sowth and
rayny. Sept. 12th, hayle this morning on Monday. Sept. 15th,
lent by Mr. Werall 40s. John Cholmley went with him to give
him and other physik ; and I answered John Cholmley the 40s.
again. Sept. 24th, Barthilmew cam. Sept. 25th, Mr. Olyver
Carter his impudent and evident disolutenes in the church. Sept.
26th, he repented and some pacification was made. Sept. 27th,
I granted a lease of thre lives to Mr. Ratclyf for two howses in
Dene Square of 7s. rent both ; fine, twenty nobles. Sept. 28th,
cam Mr. Yardely of Calcot in Chesshyre, abowt six myles wide of
Chester, toward the Holt. Nova de philosopho D. Waldero.

[page 60]

Sept. 30th, John Crockar (my good servant) had leave to go to see
his parents. He went with Barthilmew Hikman and Robert
Charles toward Branbroke, with Arthur Golding, to cure of his
fistula. John Crocker intendeth to returne abowt Easter or at
Whitsuntyde next. God be his spede ! Mr. Humphry Damport
made our stuard.
	Oct. 12th, Rafe Holden preferred a bill against Richard Walke-
son for Brereriding’s chase entyring, which I and Antony Ryve
. . . . . fals. The bill was not fownd. Oct. 22nd, John Fletcher
of Manchester went with my letters to Vanylos this Sunday morn-
ing. Nov. 3rd, Mr. John Cholmeley toward London by Market-
Harborow. Nov. 7th, the fellows and the receyver agreed not
with me in accounts. Paulo post nonam mane Arthur’s left eye
hurt at playing at fence with rapier and dagger of sticks, by a
foyne of Edmond Arnold. Nov. 10th, Mr. Burch his letter from
Mathew Palmer. Nov. 14th, the fellows wold not graunt me the
£5. for my howse-rent, as the Archbishops had graunted : and
our foundation commaundeth an howse. Nov. 17th, I sent Ed.
Arnold to London on fote with my letters to D. Julio. Dec. 3rd,
to Richard Walkeden 10s. in part of wagis. To nurse 10s. Dec.
9th, I visited the grammar schole. Dec. 13th, I wrote by the
carryer Barret to D. Cæsar. Dec. 14th, Mr. George Broke, sonne
to Mr. . . . . Broke of . . . ., cam to be acquaynted with me, whome
I used most frendely. Mr. Ratclif of Manchester cam with him,
but Mr. Heton allso cam on Tuesday after none when I had no
leyser. Dec. 17th, I lent to Mr. Barlow for his sonne a Spanish
grammer in 8vo. printed at Lovayn in anno 1555 by Bartholo-
mæus Gravay in Spanish, French, and Latin. To R. Dickonson
I payd £7. 2s. for the plate and a new bell made till 1599,
January 1st, £66.
	1598. Jan. 4th, I wrote to Barthilmew and Charles by Brad-
shaw. Jan. 17th, my brother Arnold to Chester and Vaunlos.
Jan. 18th, Ed. Arnold with my letter to London. Jan. 19th,
hora secunda a meridie I cam before the justices against James

[page 61]

Shallcross and John Lawrence for misusing my name to deceyve
Mr. Harrughby. Jan. 20th, Walter Fletcher, chirurgien, from
Barthilmew Hikman cam. Jan. 22nd, after midnight the college
gate toward Hunt’s Hall did fall, and som parte of the wall
going down the lane. I receyved letters from Mr. John Pontoys.
Jan. 24th, Walter Fletcher went with my letters to Barthilmew
Hikman and Robert Charles. Amaritudo mea circa mediam noc-
tem. Jan. 28th, the cloose was hyerd of Ed. Brydock for thre
pownd payd beforehand by me John Dee to the said Ed. Brydock,
being £4 from Candlemas next tyll Candlemas come a twelve-
month. Feb. 9th, George Birch sute was stayd at Chester uppon
his promise to compownd with me for all tyth, haye, and other
matter. Thomas Goodyer his sute and excommunication I stayed,
salvo interim jure suo. Baxter’s likewise I stayd at Chester
court. Feb. 12th, newes from Mr. Smyth, of Upton personage,
cam this Sunday. Feb. 13th, Edmond Arnold to London ;
thereuppon I sent spedily. Feb. 20th, I wrote by Oliver Ellet, the
taylor, to Mr. Nicolls to Faxton. Feb. 22nd, Mr. Nicolls cam
and wished to mete Ellet. Feb. 25th, the eclips. A clowdy day,
but great darknes abowt 9½ mane. Feb. 26th, circa mediam
noctem amaritudo mea. Feb. 27th, Mr. Nicolls rode homeward, and
met the messager a little beyond Stopford. I lent Mr. Nicolls
home with him Roger Edward’s boke to be browght to me by
Barthilmew Hikman. March 1st, I receyved Mr. Thynne his
letter for Sted’s det, and Ed. Arnold his letter of the sute from
Upton, and of the Lord Archebisshop his hard dealing. March
2nd, I sent the statute staple to London to Mr. George Brok for
Sted. I wrote letters by John Hardy, and sent them in a box.
March 5th, newes of Mistres Mary Nevell’s death by William
Nicholson, that she dyed the Fryday after Candelmas Day.
March 11th, borrowed 40s. of Mr. George Kenion, of Kersall, to
repay againe as sone as I can conveniently. Receyved by Richard
Walkeden.

[page 62]

	1600. June 10th, Set out from London. June 18th, I, my wife,
Arthur Rowland, Mistres Marie Nicols, and Mr. Richard Arnold
cam to Manchester.
	July 3rd, the Commission set uppon in the Chapter Howse.
July 7th, this morning, as I lay in my bed, it cam into my fantasy
to write a boke, “ De differentiis quibusdam corporum et spiri-
tuum.” July 8th, I writ to the Lord Bishop of Chester by Mr.
Withenstalls. July 10th, Mr. Nicols and Barthilmew Hickman
cam. July 14th, Francys Nicols and Barthilmew Hikman went
homeward. July 17th, I willed the fellows to com to me by
nine the next day. July 18th, it is to be noted of the great
pacifications unexpected of man which happened this Friday ; for
in the forenone (betwene nine and ten) where the fellows were
greatly in doubt of my heavy displeasure, by reason of their ma-
nifold misusing of themselves against me, I did with all lenity
interteyn them, and shewed the most part of the things that I
had browght to pass at London for the college good, and told
Mr. Carter (going away) that I must speak with him alone. Ro-
bert Leigh and Charles Legh were by. Secondly, the great sute
betwene Redishmer and me was stayed and by Mr. Richard
Holland his wisdom. Thirdly, the organs uppon condition was ad-
mitted. And fourthly, Mr. Williamson’s resignation granted for
a preacher to be gotten from Cambridge. July 19th, I lent Ran-
dall Kemp my second part of Hollinshed’s Great Chronicle for ij.
or iij. wekes. To Newton he restored it. July 31st, we held our
audit, I and the fellows for the two yeres last past in my absence,
Olyver Carter, Thomas Williamson, and Robert Birch, Charles
Legh the elder being receyver. I red and gave unto Mistres Mary
Nicolls her prayer.
	Aug. 5th, I visited the grammar schole, and fownd great
imperfection in all and every of the scholers to my great grief. Aug.
6th, I had a dream after midnight of my working of the philoso-
pher’s stone with other. My dreame was after midnight toward

[page 63]

day. Aug. 10th, Eucharistam suscepimus, ego, uxor, filia Ka-
tharina, et Maria Nicolls. Aug. 30th, a great tempest of mighty
wynde S.W. from 2 tyll 6, with rayne.
	Sept. 11th, Mr. Holland of Denby, Mr. Gerard of Stop-
ford, Mr. Langley, commissioners from the bishop of Chester,
authorized by the bishop of Chester, did call me before them
in the church abowt thre of the clok after none, and did deliver
to me certayn petitions put up by the fellows against me to
answer before the 18th of this month. I answered them all
eodem tempore, and yet they gave me leave to write at leiser.
Sept. 16th, Mr. Harmer and Mr. Davis, gentlemen of Flyntshire,
within four or five myle of Hurden Castell, did viset me. Sept.
29th, I burned before Mr. Nicols, his brother, and Mr. Wortley,
all Bartholomew Hikman his untrue actions.* Sept. 30th, after
the departing of Mr. Francis Nicols, his dowghter Mistres Mary,
his brother Mr. William, Mr. Wortley, at my returne from
Deansgate, to the ende whereof I browght them on fote, Mr. Roger
Kooke offred and promised his faithfull and diligent care and
help, to the best of his skill and powre, in the processes
chymicall, and that he will rather do so then to be with any in
England ; which his promise the Lord blesse and confirm ! He told
me that Mr. Anthony considered him very liberally and frendely,
but he told him that he had promised me. Then he liked in him
the fidelity of regarding such him promise.
	Oct. 13th, be it remembered that Sir Georg Both cam to
Manchester to viset Mr. Humfrey Damport, cownsaylor of Gray’s
Inne, and so cam to the colledg to me ; and after a few words of
discowrse, we agreed as concerning two or three tenements in
Durham Massy in his occupying. That he and I with the fellows
wold stand to the arbitrement of the sayd Mr. Damport, after his,
next return hither from London. John Radclyf, Mr. Damport’s

	* In a note by Dee in MS. Ashm. 488, he says, “ All Barthilmew’s reports of sight
and hering spirituall wer burnt; a copy of the first part, which was afterward fownd,
was burnt before me and my wife.”

[page 64]

man, was with him here, and Mr. Dumbell, but they hard not our
agrement ; we were in my dyning-room. Oct. 22nd, receyved a
kinde letter from the Lord Bishop of Chester in the behalfe of
Thomas Billings for a curatship. Nov. 1st, Mr. Roger Coke did
begyn to destill. Nov. 4th, the commission and jury did finde
the titles of Nuthurst due to Manchester against Mr. James
Ashton of Chaterdon. Nov. 7th, Oliver Carter his . . . . . .
before Mr. Birch, Richard Legh and Charles Legh, in the colledg
howse. Dec. 2nd, colledg awdit. Allowed my due of £7 yerely
for my howse-rent tyll Michelmas last. Arthur Dee a graunt of
the chapter clerkship from Owen Hodges, to be had yf £6 wer
payd to him for his patent. Dec. 20th, borowed of Mr. Edmund
Chetam the scholemaster £10 for one yere uppon plate, two
bowles, two cupps with handles, all silver, waying all 32 oz. Item,
two potts with cover and handells, double gilt within and without,
waying 16 oz.
	1601. Jan. 19th, borrowed of Adam Holland of Newton £5 till
Hilary day, uppon a silver salt dubble gilt with a cover, waying
14 oz. Feb. 2nd, Roger Cook his supposed plat laying to my
discredit was by Arthur my sone fownd by chaunce in a box of
his papers in his own handwriting circa meridiem, and after none
abowt 1½ browght to my knowledg face to face. O Deus, libera
nos a malo ! All was mistaken, and we reconcyled godly. Feb.
10th to 15th, Reconciliation betwene us, and I did declare to my
wife, Katharine my dowghter, Arthur and Rowland, how things
wer thus taken. Feb. 18th, Jane cam to my servyce from Clethe-
raw. Feb. 25th, R. K[oke] pactum sacrum hora octava mane.
March 2nd, Mr. Roger Coke went toward London. March 19th,
I receyved the long letters from Bartholomew Hickman hora
secunda a meridie by a carryer of Oldham. April 6th, Mr.
Holcroft of Vale Royall his first acquaintance at Manchester by
reason of William Herbert his frend. He used me and reported
of me very freely and wurshiply.
