---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 247-248"
people:
  - "Commandino, Federico"
  - "Dee, Katherine"
  - "Emperor Rudolf II"
  - "Fromond, Jane"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Kurz, Jacob"
  - "Laski, Olbracht"
places:
  - "Praha, CZ"
tags:
  - "books"
  - "correspondence"
  - "Dee and Emperor Rudolph II"
  - "Dee's reputation"
  - "mathematics"
time_of_day: "09"
---
  At 9 of the clock came Dr. Curtz on horſeback to me, to my lodging (at Doctor Hageck
his houſe by Bethleem) my wife he ſaluted, and little Katharine, my daughter.  Mr. Kelly
had gotten him into his chamber, not willing to be ſeen.
After he was come up into my little Study, and there ſet, in Mr. Kelly his uſual place, and
I in mine; I began to complain of the great injury done unto me here; for I came as a ſin-
cere and faithful ſervitour of the Emperour his Majeſty, intending all goodneſſe and honour
unto him: no hindrance, loſſe or hurt; neither came I propter divitias Cæſaris mihi colligen-
das, as I ſaid expreſſely unto his Majeſty. I was, before I came hither, of good name and
fame, both in this Court, and all Europe over, As you your ſelf Mr. Doctor (quoth I) can bear
me witneſſe: and other in this Court divers: And that here my name and fame ſhould ſuf-
fer ſhipwrack, where I thought I had been in, a ſure Haven of my principal Patrone: My
thinketh that great injury is done unto me: I know no means how to help it, but to give
you warning of the envious malitious backbiters that alſo are about this Court, that as you
find occaſion, you might encounter with this evil, and foul monſter, in ſo mighty a Princes
Cauſe intruding it ſelf.
  The Doctor ſeemed not to know what I meant. I told him, that at a Noble-mans Table,
There was, of great account, who ſaid, that there was an Engliſhman, come to the Emperours,
A bankrupt Alchimiſt, a Conjurer, and Necromantiſt: who had  ſold his own goods, and given the
Lord Laſkie the money: and that he had beguiled him: and that now he would fain get ſome of
the Emperour his money from him, &c.  The Doctor ſeemed greatly to miſlike theſe ſlanderous
words, and ſaid, that he never heard of any ſuch; with ſome few words more, of thewicked
manner of backbiters.
  After this, as concerning the report making to the Emperour, of that I had ſhewed unto
him, at his houſe, (as before is noted) he ſaid that he had made a plain and ſincere report.
Whereunto the Emperours Majeſty, had (as yet) given no anſwer.  And to be plain with
you (ſaid he) his Majeſty thinketh them almoſt either incredible, or impoſſible: and would
have ſome leaſure to conſider of them: and is deſirous to have the ſight of thoſe Latine A-
ctions you ſhewed me, or a copy of them, and eſpecially, of that, which containeth a para-
phraſis of the Apoſtolical Creed.  I anſwered, that my Books I would not deliver out of my
hands: And as for a Copy of them, I would (at leaſure) write it, that his Majeſty might
have it. And then I told him farther, that becauſe it was ſo long before I heard any word of
him, I had letters ready to ſend to the Emperours Majeſty, to have farther declared my mind
unto him, and I declared unto him the tenor of them: and he told me that about three of the
clock after noon, his man ſhould go to the Court, and if then I would ſend them, his man
ſhould carry them. I anſwered that I would expect a day or two for the Emperours return
hither. After this we talked of ſome Mathematical matters: And I ſhewed him the little
Book de ſuperficierum diviſionibus, ſet forth by me and Commandinus, printed at Pezaro in
Italy. He ſaid that he never ſaw it before: I bad him then take it with him to peruſe: and
that if I had another Copy, I would give it him; but I had none other but that. I ſhewed
him alſo the Propædeamata Aphoriſtica de præſtantioribus quibuſdam Natare virtutibus, which he
had never ſeen before. After this, with mutual curteſies offered on both parts (after the
manner of the world) he took his horſe, and returned homeward.
