---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 246-247"
people:
  - "Aylmer, John"
  - "Cooper, Jane"
  - "de Santcliment, Guillem"
  - "Emperor Rudolf II"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Laski, Olbracht"
  - "Queen Elizabeth I"
tags:
  - "correspondence"
  - "Dee and Emperor Rudolph II"
  - "money"
  - "scrying"
---
                            Tueſday,  Septembris 25.   Pragæ.
  Note : I went to Diner to the Spaniſh Embaſſadour : and carryed with me the Stone
brought me by an Angel ; and the fourth Book, wherein the manner of the bringing of it is
expreffed.  And alſo I carried with me Librum Sextum Sanctum Myſticum.
  After Diner, when I had ſhewed him theſe things : his final anſwer was , that verily he
took the doing to be by good Angel : marry, the matters to be too great : Therefore (ſaid I)
they are for the ſervice of God, and not onely man.  He ſaid he was a ſinner, and not wor-
thy to be privy, much leſſe to be a doer in them :  Notwithſtanding whatſoever he can do
therein acceptable to God, he would be moſt obedient thereto.  He deſired a Copy of the
Emperour his foreſaid letters, that he might conſider circumſpectly of the Contents before he
ſhould deliver them ; whereunto I conſented.  Rendering his honour thanks I de-
parted.
  After my return home, I found E. K. reſolved to go from hence to morrow, for his wife,
and ſo ſtraightway into  England : which was to me a grief :  But what can I do, but
refer all to the mercies of God, whom I have called upon for wiſdom to ſerve him withal ? I
have put my truſt in the Lord, I have not murmured at any ſuch pangs and tentations
hitherto.
  The mercies of the Higheſt be upon me, as I have put my truſt in him.
                                          Amen.
  Now were we ( all ) brought to great penury : not able without the Lord Laſkies, or ſome
heavenly help, to ſuſtain our ſtate any longer.
  Beſides this, I underſtood of the Queens diſpleaſure for my departure , and of the Biſhop
of London his intent to have begun to have accuſed me of Conjuration , and ſo to have had
the ſecret aſſiſtance of you know whom.
  Tu  es Deus fortitudo mea, refugium meum Suſceptor meus, & liberator meus.
                                          Amen.
