---
author_key: "Dee, John"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 245"
people:
  - "de Santcliment, Guillem"
  - "Emperor Rudolf II"
  - "Kurz, Jacob"
places:
  - "Praha, CZ"
tags:
  - "correspondence"
  - "Dee and Emperor Rudolph II"
time_of_day: "08/12"
---
  Note : As I had finiſhed this Action, and was come to my Study door ; Emericus was re-
turned again from the Spaniſh Embaſſadour, to whom I had ſent him deſirous to know his
leaſure for me : who had now ſent me word by Emericus to come to diner, & ſo he would have
leaſure, &c.  Whereof I was right glad ; and went thither to diner :, who into his inermoſt
Study ( where he himſelf was writing of letters ) cauſed me to be brought. And after I had
complained of injury and violence done unto me, by foul ſlanders, and that, at his Honours
Table : ( to which his Honour, in my behalf had replied : and therefore moſt humbly, and
ſincerely I did thank him ) I ſaid that the Emperous Majeſty himſelf could bear me witneſſe,
that I uſed this phraſe unto him, that I came not for his riches as, Non veni ad vos O Sereniſſime
Cæſar propter divitias veſtras, ut inde ego dives fierem, ſed à Deo miſſu{s}, non audeo aliter facere
quam ejus ad veſtram Cæſaream Majeſtatem voluntatem declarare, &c.  And therefore , How
falſy they ſlandered me, it was evident : and becauſe I perceive that Doctor Curtz hath not
dealt neither with due entertainment of me as of a ſtranger, or a Sudent, or a Mathematitian,
or of one whom ( to my face ) he gave great praiſe unto, as of one long ſince of great fame in
Germany, and ſo in his good eſtimation, &c. And leaſt of all, as of one, who offered ſo great
curteſies to the Emperours Majeſty as he was made witneſſe of : I thought good to ſend unto
the Emperours Majeſty this letter following, and ſo read it unto him after diner,  when I
ſhewed him Librum Pragenſem ſive Cæſareum ; and moreover Librum decimum, ( whoſe former
title was Libri Sexti Mytici Tertiarius ) and there ſhewed him divers Actions in Latine al-
ready tranſlated, becauſe now to tranſlate ſo to him of the Engliſh, did ſeem to me both te-
dious, and to him not ſo readily pleaſant.  All things on his part conſidered, his ſummary
final concluſion was, as well of the laſt offer in this my letter, as of the great actions and di-
vine purpoſes.  For the firſt he declared that he was lineally deſcented out of the conſan-
guinity, of one a Gentleman, but unlettred at the firſt, who left his wife, children, and family in
Maiorca, and aſcended an Hill there, and in place ſolitary remained an whole year, and at the
years end, he came down, but ſo learned and wiſe, that all who knew him before, wondred at it.
And that the ſame man was called Raymondo Lullio : and that he made that which is called
the Philoſophers Stone, as in England ( ſaid he ) I underſtand is good record of it : Therefore
I ſee, quoth he, that it is a truth and poſſible : and as he hath granted the knowledtge of it to
one man, ſo may he grant it to another, &c.  And as for the other higher matters, I perceive
that GOd intendeth ſome great matter in this world.  But I am not able tol judge or determine
of it: But I am of this mind, wherein I can any way further the ſervice of God, I will be
rady and obedient, &c.  And as for the Emperours perſon himſelf, I find him of a good na-
ture, curteous, and moſt zealouſly Catholick : yea ready to ſhed his blood in the cauſe, if
opportunity required.  He underſtandeth the Latine well, and ſpeaketh ſufficently well :
That is true ( quoth I ) for he ſpake well in Latine to me divers things.  Moreover (ſaid
he ) as concerning you, I ſaw him very well affectionated, making great account of your book, &c.
Therefore you are not to regard theſe Dutch mens ill tongues, who hardly can brook any
ſtranger, &c.
  Upon farther matter that I had to ſhew him, I offered my ready repair unto him at all
times of his good leaſure being called or warned.  And he deſirous to ſee the Stone brought
to me by an Angel, willed me to come to morrow alſo, to Diner : I promiſed him, and ſo
with thanks yielded to his honour, I departed toward my Lodging at Bethelem in old
Prage.
