---
author_key: "Dee, John"
calendar: "Gregorian"
edition_key: "book"
license: "CC0 1.0"
location: "page 171-172"
people:
  - "Dee, John"
  - "Kelley, Edward"
  - "Laski, Olbracht"
places:
  - "Krakow, Lesser Poland, PL"
related_dates:
  - "1584-06-22"
  - "1584-06-23"
time_of_day: "~15"
---
             Sunday, Cracovia, Junii 24. à Meridie horam circiter tertiam.
  Δ. Note, while at my lodging ( by Saint Stephens ) I was writing the Note, ( on the page
going next before ) of the Tentations of Friday and Saterday : E.K. was at my Lord A.L.
his lodging ( at the Franciſcan Fryars, where he lay at Phyſick ) and at the ſame time , this
happened, as followeth ;
  As my Lord A. L. and E. K. ſate together, conferring and conſulting of our affairs , of
Gods mercies, and of ſundry tentations of the ſpiritual enemy, and  afterward,  as the Lord
A. L. was reading Rofenſis pſalm. de Fiducia in Deum, ſuddenly, upon E. K. his right ſhoulder,
did a heavy thing ſeem to ſit, or reſt, whereof he told the Lord A. L. And afterward was this
voyce uttered by that Creature in Latine.
Laſky, veniet tempus, cum tu portabis verſum ſedecimum, illius   Pſalmi undecimi, in vexili tuo,
& vinces inimicos tuos.
  Then A. L fought in Davids Pſalter for  the eleventh Pſalm, and ſixteenth verſe thereof:
and while he was ſo about that Pſalm, The voyce ſaid that he meant not that Pſalm of Da-
vid, but the eleventh Pſalm of Roffenſis : which Pſalm  the Lord A.L. was then in reading to
E. K{.} and was about the verſe, Hic labor ac dolor, &c. being the ſixth verſe.
  By and by after, the voyce ſaid in Engliſh.
                            ⸺ Truſt thou in God.
  Hereupon the Lord A. L.  did read forth that Pſalm of Roffinſis, and when he came to the
ſixteenth verſe thereof, being
          Si ambulavero in medio tribuletionis, me cuſtodies adverſus inimitos tu ...
          Manum tuam extendes, & dextera tua me ſalvabis.
  Thereupon the voyce ſaid : Put to the firſt line of the next verſe : And that was Domine tu
omnia pro mie perficies.
  And as he would have read further, the voyce willed him to ſtay at thoſe words, and ſaid
as followeth :
  ⸺ I ſwear unto thee by the true and living God, that this ſhall come to paſſe.
  Then E.K. ſaid unto the Creature : In the name of God, Who art thou ?  And he an-
ſwered in Latin, and ſaid ,
  Ego Sum AV E, cras plura audietis.
            Δ. Gloria, laus, honor & gratiarum actio perennis ſit Deo Noſtro, omtpotenti
                & Miſericordi.  Amen.
